[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
Hey.
Hey. Hey.
Hey. Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Happy.
Hey. Hey.
Heat.
Hey. Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Heat. Hey. Hey. Hey.
That's
why
[Music]
Heat.
I believe we have Council Member Ulik
and Vice Mayor Santa Cruz online.
Uh, everybody else,
Council Member Cunningham, ready to
start? Okay. Uh, for the record, Council
Member Ole and Vice Mayor Santa Cruz are
participating electronically through
Microsoft Teams. We're going to start
study session and item one is executive
session. M clerk.
>> Item one, executive session discussion
regarding quarterly non-disclosure
agreement reform and transparency and is
being held pursuant to ARS section
38-431.03
A3 and A4. May I have a motion to go
into executive session, please?
>> So moved.
>> Second.
>> There is a motion and a second. Any
further discussion?
Hearing none. All those in favor, please
signify by saying I. I.
>> I. I. I I
>> any against motion carries. We'll be out
in what do we say 30 minutes. Okay.
[Music]
Hey, hey, hey.
baby.
Hey
[Music]
Hey. Hey. Hey.
Hey.
[Music]
Hey. Hey.
Hey,
hey, hey.
Hey.
Hey. Hey. Hey, hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey, hey, hey.
Hey. Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Hey, hey, hey.
Happy.
[Music]
Hey. Hey.
Heat. Heat.
[Music]
Black
baby.
Hey. Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
Love you.
[Music]
Heat. Heat. N.
Heat. Heat.
[Music]
Hey, hey, hey.
Happy
[Music]
birthday.
Heat. Heat.
[Music]
Hey, hey, hey.
Hey.
Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
Heat
[Music]
up.
Hey. Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Hey, hey, hey.
Hey
honey.
[Music]
Hey.
Heat. Heat.
[Music]
Heat. Heat. N.
There's There's a motion and a second.
Any further discussion on returning to
study? Hearing none. All those in favor,
please signify by saying I.
>> I.
>> I. I.
>> Any against? Motion carries. What is the
council's pleasure for item two?
Honorable mayor, members of council, an
appropriate motion would be to proceed
as discussed in executive session to
direct the city manager and the city
attorney to develop a written policy on
the use and management of non-disclosure
agreements within the city of Tucson.
>> Some moved.
>> There is a motion.
>> Second.
>> A motion and a second. Any further
discussion?
Hearing none. All those in favor, please
signify by saying I.
>> I.
>> Any against? Motion carries. Item three.
Time has been set aside for an update on
the city of Tucson's major streets and
routes plan. Mr. Manager.
>> Uh thank you honorable mayor and members
of the council. Uh joining us uh here
today at the table are folks from our
department of transportation and
mobility. And um there is as a reminder
this study session item to talk through
the issues and matters and then later
tonight u there's also an item where
actually decision-m would occur later
tonight. So with that, I would turn it
over to Department of Transportation
Mobility Director Sam Credial.
>> Thank you, Mr. Manager, and good
afternoon, madame mayor, members of the
council. Um almost exactly two years to
the day, um you've given us direction to
update the major streets and routes plan
and map. Um we've been working uh really
diligently at that and we're really
happy to report the results to that um
to you today. Um, this effort has been
led by uh, planning uh, and programming
administrator Patrick Hartley and his
team. And so, Patrick is here to walk
you through uh, the recommendations and
provide you with an update and then
we'll be available to answer any
questions. Patrick, take it away.
>> Thank you, Director Kio,
Mayor Romero, members of council, I have
some brief prepared remarks and then
we'll be happy to open it up for
comments or any discussion on this item.
So, as uh director Credio mentioned, in
October of 2023, mayor and council
directed staff from the Department of
Transportation and Mobility to update
the major streets and routes plan, which
we often refer to as the MSNR, and I
will continue to refer to that through
the remainder of this um opening remarks
to make it consistent with re recent
city and regional planning efforts and
policy efforts. The MSNR document
consists of two key elements. a plan
policy uh a polic plan and policy
document as well as a supporting map.
The purpose of the MSNR which has shaped
city development since about 1990 1982
is twofold. It assigns a street
classification to all of Tucson's
roadways. So this is your arterial, your
collector and local streets. All that is
coming out of the major streets and
routes plan as well as establishes
future rights of way in the event of
roadway improvements or roadway
widenings. And the way that that right
of way I'm going to move this closer to
my mouth. I keep dipping away.
Thanks. Um
is really operationalized is that in the
event of development or redevelopment of
parcels within the city, there are
setback requirements applied to parcels.
So basically, if the right-of-way value
says 100 feet, 50 feet from the center
line, new development at that parcel
then has to be set back further from the
roadway in anticipation of future
roadway improvements.
Initially, the major streets and routes
uh was created to support roadway
widenings and that was explicit in the
policy document and was the core intent
and feature of it. And while this has
undoubtedly saved the city of Tucson
money and um impact of our projects over
the years since 1982 when since it was
originally passed. Um it has kind of
outgrown its usefulness given our
existing policy framework here in the
city because it has also created um
significant barriers to infield
development by reducing the full use of
certain parcels especially where we have
really constrained uh rights of way in
older parts of the city while
simultaneously reinforcing autoentric
development patterns. So, the goal of
this update, as directed by mayor and
council, was to continue to use the
policy framework established within the
original MSNR plan, but to repurpose it
to better align with the transportation
of priorities established under the
recent city policy efforts such as move
Tucson and our complete streets efforts
while simultaneously reducing a barrier
to infill development and redevelopment
on the private side of the property
line. To accomplish this, staff reviewed
and revised future right-of-way needs
and recommended updating roadway roadway
classifications citywide. For example,
to illustrate kind of the effort we went
through, the existing MSNR may show a
future right-of-way value of 120 ft of
future right-of-way need um which would
be anticipating a six lane future
roadway widening um on a corridor where
we are no longer anticipating this
needed capacity. For example, Stone
Avenue, just north of downtown, north of
six here, had a an existing value of 120
ft, anticipating at someday in the
future that Stone Avenue would be
widened to six lanes. We no longer see
that as a need in the department. So,
those are the kind of reviews that we
went through to either reduce or
eliminate that uh that right-of-way
value again to open that up for more
development opportunities and to better
align with our transportation
priorities.
The update that is presented before you
represents the first full review of the
MSNR since its creation. We had pre
previously handled these on more of a
peacemeal fashion where we had an
individual project or development coming
through and adjusted the MSNR accord
accordingly. This time we looked at the
plan in its totality
and the magnitude of this change is that
we are making a recommendation to reduce
right-of-way requirements on 43% of city
streets as measured along the center
line, maintaining the existing MSNR
right ofway on 33% of streets and
eliminating any right-of-way requirement
on 22% of streets while also removing 3%
of streets from the major streets and
routes plan. Ultimately, this totals
about 70% reduction in the right-of-way
requirements across the city. Again,
looking to support those transportation
priorities and um allow for greater
opportunities for infill development.
In addition to the right-of-way
reductions, we are also recommending
reclassification of a number of streets
from arterial to collector, collector to
arterial, local to collector, or
collector to local street based on
traffic volumes and other criteria.
During this period of um updating the
plan, we also went through a fairly
broad public engagement process in the
spring of this year uh where we u
provided multiple presentations to the
development stakeholder community,
created an interactive virtual story
map, held in-person and virtual open
houses, met with utility providers, held
individual meetings with neighborhood
associations upon request. um two study
sessions with the planning commission as
well as a public hearing ultimately uh
resulting in the recommendation of
approval and all told we received about
150 comments from members of the public
over this period all of which we've
provided responses to which was included
in attachment E with your materials. One
final comment on this is that if we are
proposing changing the classification
structure of city streets that this will
have no impact on any existing funding
program. So, Proposition 411, which is
repaving all local streets in the city,
will go forward at as it is currently
planned. The collector street program,
which is repaving a number of collector
streets, will use the classification
system that was in effect at the time of
the approval of those programs. It will
not be affected by these changes. And
with that, I can take any questions or
the director can take any questions.
Thank you very much.
>> And mayor, that concludes our remarks on
this item. I do just want to take a
moment to acknowledge the extraordinary
work done by Patrick and his team uh
James Castanada and Ben Alias. Um this
project was all completed totally
in-house um without the use of a
consultant. It was a an extraordinary
effort by our team and I'm um very proud
of the work that they've presented to
you this evening. Thank you.
>> Thank you, Mr. Credo. Really appreciate
it, Patrick um and all the team that at
uh Department of Transportation and
Mobility for your incredible work. Um, I
just wanted to also thank the planning
commission for going through the process
with us and and their hard work on this
item. Um, they unanimously approved the
proposed changes as we see them today.
Um, and I also want to remind the
community that these changes that we're
doing today align with mayor and council
uh plans and strategic action plans that
we've approved as a community like move
Tucson Tucson resilient together and our
complete streets policy. So in effect
making
um a lot more land um inside our urban
core much more usable and um
transportation um developmentoriented.
So, it uh it allows and encourages
uh multiuse
um uh development on on the land that's
currently available in our corridors in
our city. So, I really want to
appreciate the work that you've all done
and open it up for questions, comments
from our colleagues of on the council if
you have any. Council member Doll. Thank
you, mayor, and thank you, Sam, Pat, uh,
Patrick, and your team for doing
excellent work. We've heard a lot from
neighbors, um, from residents living
along mountain, uh, the north of Roger
and along Liberlos, from Campbell to,
um, Stone about wanting to maintain for
various reasons uh, the status as a
local, and it does have they do have
more traffic, so it could, and I think
the recommendation is that it become a
collector street. I'm going to put forth
an amendment. um on behalf of these
neighbors and and I think they're
justified to keep it as a local status
and uh um and I'll be doing that at at
the regular session and I know we've
talked about it. You all are prepared
for that. Do you see any horrible
impacts of that?
>> Mayor Romero, excuse me, by the way.
Uh, council member doll, member, members
of council, uh, we don't have any
particular concerns with removing that
from the collector list. It had been
operating limber loss from first to
Oracle as a, uh, previously was a
collector street, had been downgraded to
a local street in an amendment in the
mid 2000s and we were looking at traffic
volumes and we're recommending it
returning it to collector status.
>> Yeah. and rather than first because
between Stone and First it is a five
lane and it seems like it's much more of
a collector there than than elsewhere.
It would be from my amendment will be
from Stone to Campbell.
Thank you.
>> Any others?
All righty. So for for me I I I just
want to understand how the traffic
volume data um related to the question
that was asked right now. uh how do the
traffic volume data and other metrics
were used to determine uh roadway
reclassifications?
[Music]
Mayor Romero, thank you for the
question. So we looked at four criteria
when determining the classification or
revisiting the classifications of
existing roadways. So we looked at
traffic volumes which are collected on a
rotating basis regionwide by Puma
Association of Governments. And what
they do is a 48 hour count typically in
the fall. So we would get t, you know,
um, more regular traffic patterns,
avoiding holidays, avoiding the summer
season. And we looked at the historic
values of those as well as the future
projections.
The way the policy is written, roadways
that are operating between 2500 and
12,000 vehicles a day are currently
typically classified as a collector
street. Those above 12,000 vehicles a
day typically are classified as
arterials. We also compared it against
the federal functional classification
system which uses the same terminology
arterial collector although it is
applied to our streets differently than
we do it locally. You know we're kind of
expressing that local control but we are
looking at opportunities to bring that
into consistency. The other criteria we
looked at would be any existing traffic
control, striping, traffic signals, you
know, which direction had the right of
way at intersections and also how it
operates within the network in terms of
spacing. Typically, roadways that are on
the section line are classified as
arterials.
Midway between that are collector
streets. So, we looked at those four
criteria and made those determinations
and recommendations.
>> Thank you, Patrick. And I do see council
member Ulik's hand is up.
I just wanted to uh um speak in support
of council member Doll's uh um
suggestion and and sounds like a
proposed action for this evening and to
me that Liberlos Mountain Avenue area um
to the point about land uses it it's a
very unique area with regard to uh the
character and land uses existing and so
um for that reason I think that it
really comport uh with our broader
vision and plans um to uh remove those
sections noted by council member Dah.
Thank you.
>> Thank you, Council Member Wulik. I too
agree that you know it it um uh
absolutely makes sense. neighbors in the
area want to make sure that there's some
protections in terms of the development
possibility and so that you know it is
mostly for um um that area. I I
appreciate it. Uh campus farms is
something that um uh we all appreciate.
So thank you. I'll be supporting that as
well.
Um,
also can you explain
how this update might impact um, uh, the
possibilities of bottlenecks? I know
that
we changed um, in Stone on Stone Avenue,
uh, we changed the amount of lanes with
an RTA project there. And I know that
moving and changing capacity in one
particular road sometimes might provide
unintended consequences elsewhere in our
traffic system. Um
but how do we make sure that the changes
are not creating unintended bottlenecks
in other areas of our city and and how
we do that and how we calculated that.
Mayor Merrick, members of the council,
thank you. Another excellent question.
So what we were really looking at when
we were making determination for those
future rights of way to see where we
could do a reduction because we weren't
anticipating the number of future travel
lanes as we were you know in 1982 when
the plan was originally developed was we
looked at re recent long range planning
efforts that were taking that more
systemic approach um in terms of how
changes to one roadway would operate
something you know on a parallel
corridor. So those were largely the long
range regional transportation plan known
as the R map developed at puma
association of governments. They have
2045 traffic projections and then also
building off of the move to Tucson kind
of network that we were anticipating. So
all of the future rights of way that we
are proposing are consistent with the
project descriptions as they are
currently uh listed in the move Tucson
master plan for the city.
>> All righty. So what's next for um for
how we proceed? Yeah, great question,
mayor. So, this evening we do have
scheduled a public hearing. Uh Patrick
and myself will be in attendance at the
conclusion of that public hearing. Um
we're looking for uh approval of the
major streets and routes plan and map
update and we will be available to
answer any questions that might come up
um following the public hearing.
>> Thank you so much. Really appreciate you
both. Thank you.
Uh if there's no more questions from my
colleagues on the council, then we'll
move on to item four.
And item four, time has been set aside
for an update on the city of Tucson. Oh,
no, that's item three. I'm sorry. I've
requested this time for mayor and
council to review and discuss a plan to
improve safety and security on the
transit system, including buses at bus
stops and transit center. This is an
update that was generated in response to
mayor and council direction in August.
As a matter of fact, um I believe that
we have been mayor and council have been
expressing concern
uh for a couple of years now. um
regarding our our transit safety and
security. Uh we need an action plan
that uh uses clear data as we make the
choices on the mayor and council uh to
keep our city safe.
um an action plan for transit security
is necessary. Uh because we have been
all of our offices have been receiving
input and and feedback from community
from uh bus operators
um and others um to make sure that we
are providing a a a a clean safe transit
system. And to be honest with you, I
think that it it's it safety and
security is not just uh for our transit
system, but for every area of our city,
for every neighborhood, every park. Um
and uh this is a continuation of a
conversation that we started a couple of
years back. Uh but in August we gave
clear direction from Vice Mayor Santa
Cruz to uh come back to Mayor and
council with a clear action plan on
transit safety.
Um,
I know that during uh in in the memo
provided to Marin Council, uh we talk
about the RTA Next and the possibility
of investment uh coming in from RTA next
um to make sure that we have uh funds to
keep our bus stops clean and safe as
well as our transit uh centers. Um, I
think that it is important that we
continue this conversation, that we give
clear direction uh to our city manager,
our uh department of transportation and
mobility director as well as our chief
of police. I know that we're doing a lot
of work right now uh to keep our uh
transit system uh safe, but we all know
that more is needed. and um I'm I'm
looking forward to the presentation and
the questions from my colleagues on the
council. Uh again, I think that um it's
important that we reflect
uh on some of the social
and public safety issues impacting
our not just our transit system, but
impacting our city, uh our
neighborhoods, our parks,
um and different areas of our city. I
think that it's uh we have to really
look at the root of the problem
happening in our city. Um that a lot of
what is spilling into our transit system
is um uh the fentinel public health
crisis that's happening in our streets
not just in the city of Tucson but
throughout the country. I talked to
mayors around the country and these are
the very similar concerns that they have
and so I try and borrow uh ideas uh that
have worked in other cities and um we're
working hard with all of our uh
departments to make sure that we can
offer this uh safety and security action
plan uh for our transit system. So I'm
going to open it up, Mr. manager, if you
want to introduce the item and then uh
we'll go through the presentation and
open up for my colleagues on the
council.
>> Thank you, mayor, and uh members of the
council. Uh here with me today is Sam
Credo, director of transportation
mobility and our police chief, Chad
Kasmar, and they're here representing a
number of uh folks from the city and our
uh independent contractor that operates
most of our transit assets. Uh it's all
teamwork and including our community
safety, health, and wellness team uh to
be able to address not just what is
identified as kind of the symptoms that
we see showing up in our transit system
and as you indicated spilling over into
our transit system um but also those
root causes that you identified. So what
you have here today is um actions that
are in progress that are ongoing to
address those symptoms. identification
of additional challenges and and the
challenges quite frankly have moved a
bit faster than our ability to to keep
up with them. But we're we're in the job
of trying to catch up on that and and
assure that um riders and drivers have a
a safe experience on our transit
systems. Uh, as you indicated, we do
identify what where we could deploy the
additional resources should RTA next
come to fruition um in this ex in these
specific areas. And we're really seeking
your your input on what you see here
today. Um, actions that you'd like us to
continue down the path and or increase
investment. Um, and ultimately uh we
would while we have an action plan in
front of you, it's an action plan light.
What we want to be able to prevent is
use your input in order to give you the
action plan formal and written and laid
out so that you know precisely what
we're doing and where we're doing it. So
with that, I'll turn it over to the team
to kind of go through the information
and then we're we're really craving your
feedback on these items.
>> Thank you, Mr. Manager and uh Madame
Mayor, members of the council. Um Chief
Kasmar and I are going to go through
this presentation um together. Um, we
have some information we want to share
with you and I I appreciate um the
opening comments, mayor, and and also
just recognition from the city manager
that while Chad and I are sitting here
at the table, there's a whole team of
people that help prepare all of the
material associated with this item. Um,
this is a very serious and important
conversation and we take it as such. So,
let's go ahead and dive in here. We're
going to talk a little bit about the
incidents and perceptions of safety and
security related to the public transit
system. Uh identification of some
current strategies and costs associated
with that and then some opportunities
where we know uh we can make some
improvements and enhancements including
that RTA next investment.
So, this map was also included in your
material. And really, all it's intended
to do is just provide some scale and
context to what we're talking about in
terms of some of the challenges we're
experiencing across our transit system.
This map shows all of the the routes and
has some some dots associated with um
incidents related to um to the transit
system. Uh the intent of this again is
just to identify where we have some some
issues across our city and I think
there's no surprise about some of these
corridors. We've identified Fort LOL,
Stone Avenue, um Swan, Broadway, uh
South 6th Avenue. Um most common
challenges that we are seeing within our
transit system right now are related to
open air drug use. I mean that's
probably the number one challenge that
we're experiencing right now. associated
with that there's a large group
loitering and vandalism is very much on
the rise and I'll be able to show you
some examples of that here in just a
moment.
So this uh is Princeton Oracle um
intersection and you can see the the
transit stop there in the background and
what you see is just a large group of
folks congregating. We we have a a
second photo here that shows you know a
better look at what the the transit
rider might experience if they're going
to this uh particular bus stop. Um, you
know, obviously most of these folks are
likely not using
>> this bus stop is located at what
business?
>> This is at Prince and Oracle. Oh, this
is in front of a Circle K, sir.
>> Thank you.
>> And what you see is um again loitering,
trash, graffiti. Um this is uh you know
just a snapshot of what we're seeing.
Um I mentioned uh bus shelter vandalism.
And one of the things that is on the
rise, at least I've not seen since my
time here at the city, is vandalism of
our bus stops. more more than ever
before. Um this particular picture is a
trash can that um somebody lit on fire
that then spread to the bus shelter. Um
we are also seeing an unprecedented
amount of graffiti and um uh folks
defacing the uh advertising boxes that
you see there in the background um
causing you know just a lot of harm and
damage to um the amenities that our
transit riders um you know so dearly
rely on. Um, Fort Lan Country Club has
been a a particularly challenging
location for us. Um, you can see here
we've got remnants of an encampment. Um,
there are often been times where people
are hanging out behind and around the
bus stop. Um, what we found is that the
flat surfaces really attract people uh
because it's an area where they can, you
know, set their drugs on, do drugs. Um,
I'm actually going to have an after
photo. This is the before because we
were actually able to do some things at
this particular location to improve it.
And then uh Speedway in Albernon is
another location. Um really all four
corners, but the southwest corner was
particularly challenging for us. And
there was a number of reasons why. The
first is this particular bus shelter um
actually had the traffic signal control
cabinets located behind the bus stop uh
behind the bus shelter and there was a
concrete pad and a little seat wall
around it that made a perfect area for
people to sit, congregate, hang out. Um
and ultimately that led to pretty severe
damage to our controller cabinet. and it
was lit on fire actually multiple times.
Um but again I'm going to be able to
show you some strategies that we uh were
able to deal with this particular
location.
So in terms of perceptions um we thought
it was really important that we try to
get some feedback from passengers um
specifically as well as our drivers and
I'll I'll talk about that in just a
moment. Um, on the onset, you know, it
was really meant to try to get all try
to get the word out to everybody riding
the bus. And at the transit centers, we
had both a an online survey as well as a
paper survey. Um, you know, in full
transparency, we have concerns that the
online survey was shared broadly and so
we really it's very hard even though the
first question is which routes do you
ride? It's very hard to um confirm the
validity validity of who filled out that
survey. Um, but the paper surveys, you
had to get on the bus and actually fill
out the paper survey on the bus. And so,
um, what I share with you today is is
the responses of those paper surveys and
some of the key safety concerns that the
passenger shared with us. Um, again,
you're going to see a theme here, drug
use and intoxication, loitering, um,
enforcement, cleanliness, and
maintenance. Um, when we ask riders, you
know, their sentiment on how safe they
feel while while riding, I'm encouraged
by the fact that over 40% actually said
they felt safe or very safe. Uh, same
with their their feeling at bus stops.
Again, it was almost equal to those that
felt safe versus unsafe. Um, where there
was actually an overwhelming response
from our passengers is at the transit
centers. There was about half that had
some safety concerns at the transit
centers. Um, and then I'm also
encouraged because we're making a
significant investment in this area is
that o over 40% of the passengers in
this survey indicated that they were
satisfied or very satisfied with the
security response in the transit system.
Uh next we also did a survey with our
operators um at let's see at the time of
creating this um survey or I'm sorry
this presentation we had 118 survey
responses and you know there are
definitely some concerning
>> ma'am how many operators do we have
>> 425 sir um and and by the way you know
we we had to um we had to cut off at
some point so we could get this material
in. I I believe that we're still taking
um input and feedback from the drivers.
But the concerning the key safety
concerns are again drug use, loitering,
violence and harassment of drivers, um
concern about how they can enforce the
ask once policy. And interestingly, and
this was a great insight by our
operators is uh poor lighting and
visibility at bus stops. And I'm going
to come back to that here in just a
moment. They identified some routes that
they felt were most challenging. um
routes 11 Alberon Aaho way, route 16
Oracle South 6, route 25 on Park Avenue
and route 34 on Fort LOL and Craightofra
and overall I think what the feedback we
got from the operators is just a general
sense of concern um regarding how safe
they feel driving their bus um how safe
they feel on the routes that they drive
um definitely concerns about um adequate
lighting at the bus stops um concern
about um how effective effectively um we
can police some of these challenges and
um just uh overall concern about how um
management can uh you know make a better
effort in making sure that operators
feel safe.
So now I want to talk a little bit about
what we are doing and to address some of
these concerns. So Sunran utilizes a
contract with American Guard Services um
for private security. Um there are
nearly a thousand hours of deployed
guards weekly. That includes at the
south yard which is uh at the Thomas O'
Price Service Center. The Northard which
is the uh Northwest maintenance um
facility for Suntran. And then the three
transit center LA Ronstat and Tono and
you can see the hours that we have um
security guards there. And then
obviously the ones that we probably
utilize the most are our roving security
and leapfrog guard. Those are the ones
that are actually out dealing with
issues at the bus stops and responding
to calls on the buses. U the annual cost
for that is um just over $1.5 million.
And then a few years ago um Suntran was
able to take the cleaning of um bus
stops and shelters uh inhouse. And so I
want to talk a little bit about what we
do in terms of maintenance and cleaning.
Um we have over 2200 bus stops
systemwide and about 1,800 of those are
in the city of Tucson. and just over
half of those do have shelters. We have
a staff of 15 people, uh, seven twoerson
crews and one supervisor that are
responsible for cleaning and maintaining
all of those bus stops. Um, primarily
the bus shelters. 100 priority stops are
cleaned every day. Um, and I believe
those 100 stops can vary depending on
when we get calls and who the calls are
from. You know, we try to make sure if
there's an issue, we we get to those
every day. There are six priority
corridors that are cleaned three times
per week. That's Oracle, South 12th,
Stone, South 6th, Broadway, and
Speedway. And then all other stops in
the system, we try to clean them at
least once per week. Um the annual cost
for that is a little over a million
dollars. That includes both the labor,
um the the vehicles, as well as the cost
to make repairs to shelters when they're
damaged, like the one I showed you
before.
And I think this is where I turn it over
to my colleague, Chief Kasmar.
>> Thanks, Sam. Honorable mayor, members of
council. Um, I think Sam's done a great
job of laying some foundation for the
complexity of the issue, as well as the
mayor really tying in many, many ongoing
uh, mayor council conversations related
to a public health crisis, which is yet
driving additional challenges within our
transit system. So, what I'd like to add
to the conversation is you've heard a
lot from me about our problem oriented
policing concepts that we've deployed
uh, really over the last decade. So when
we when we talk about, you know, how do
we address over 1,700 different bus
stops within the city, 2,000 in our
larger geographic area, three transit
centers, a system that's seen nearly a
$3 million or 3 million rider uh
wrership increase from from 3 years ago
to what we're forecasting today? How do
we effectively police that? And we're,
you know, we've also laid some
foundation for data only tells one part
of the story. If people if if our
community is driving through an area and
they don't feel safe, it doesn't matter
that, you know, our our violent crime is
down 12% on a 5-year average or that our
property part one property crimes are
down 23%. They're driving through,
they're they're seeing what they
perceive as crime. There there are
certainly some uh challenges with um
enforcing the laws, what what's
applicable Tucson City Code, what's
enforceable Arizona revised statutes,
and then making sure that the officers
have time to proactively do that work.
So, what we do is we we've had over
15,000 uh uh POP events this year. We
track those as general, parks, and
businesses. Right now, we're adding a
category for transit systems so we can
better tell our story. That also means
that we have to marry uh data from
transportation and mobility and and and
how riders feel or how their bus drivers
feel compared to the data that we're
tracking on a monthly basis when we're
really focused on two of the of our four
strategic initiatives as you've heard me
at Nauseium, our narcotics related
issues and uh um violent crime focus and
those data sets don't always marry up.
But again, we have to take the
information that we're hearing from our
community and our colleagues and our
team workers and make sure that we're
being present providing the support that
they need. So, we will be shifting uh I
can't double the uh the 15,000 uh POP
events that we've done this year. We
have to be smart and we have to
strategically move and align some of our
proactive efforts uh on on some of the
map that you've seen. So, when we
overlay some of our focuses and in the
areas that transportation mobility have
provided to us, there's about a 40%
correlation. We're not surprised to see
any of those events, but they're not
necessarily the drivers of what we would
call our our of our key focus areas. So
we're having to shift some of our
resources over to make sure that we're
marrying our two teams efforts and we
can be responsive to the community. Uh
coordinating obviously Sunr having those
over 15,000 contacts just having them
present is going to deter a lot of that
crime and so it it really uh captures
putting the right work in the right
hands and it doesn't always require
police officer but that the security
officers are a smart use of resources
and we have a a good amount of
collaboration with them. Now, I will
talk a little bit more about that with
challenges cuz of course there's going
to be times where somebody's not
responsive to the direction of a of a
security officer and it's going to
require a police officer to respond
environmental and and safety
enhancements. Um, this is also not a new
conversation with with any of uh council
offices as we've worked individually
with both of you and and our two teams
on on some challenges and Speedway
Swan's a great example of how we've uh
responded to the southeast corner, made
some environmental challenges. largely
that deters, but we we really do have to
dissect root cause solutions when we're
talking about a
>> What's the name of the business on the
southwest corner of Speedway and Swan?
>> McDonald's.
>> The McDonald's.
>> Excuse me, council member. Can you hold
just a second and let the chief finish
and then we'll open it up for questions
and comments.
>> So, as our community is aware that when
folks drive through as as we've both Sam
and I got feedback last weekend and
there was a large amount of folks um
sitting there, but that's not always the
case. So again, it's it's recognizing
that at at times we will be treating
symptoms to be responsive, but we have
to continue to strive for root cause
solutions. So the the the vegetation,
the landscaping, the lighting, the
signage technology, that's also a
conversation we've been having. We're
going to have at next council, but
having pan, tilt, zoom cameras and
expanding those allows CESARK real-time
camera monitoring to say, "Hey, it's
probably time to get a resource over or
the person wearing navy blue and and
pink patches was just smoking fentanyl."
we can direct officers to that specific
location, address the one issue. So
again, as we're unpacking 16 over 16
million riders, who's you know, how do
we increase uh transit system
accountability? You you've you've heard
me say systems accountability with a lot
of of different issues lately. And it's
going to take a metropolitan government
approach in conjunction with our
judicial partners and our PM county
attorney to really identify long-term
sustainable uh solutions. Um offduty
staffing as as uh the city, Mr. city
manager uh discussed depending on uh
some of the RTA potential funding and
where that goes. We're also looking and
we've collaborated with the city
attorney's office and transportation
mobility to develop what could be an
offduty program or officers. So that
wouldn't be coming out of my general
fund necessarily, but it would be
specific uh much like we do through our
offduty program right now with the
Ronstat Center. So challenges obviously
uh volume of security events uh it is no
secret that um our town right now is is
overwhelmed our community is overwhelmed
with substant substance use and mental
health disordered folks and that's
driving as we discussed last council
meeting shopliftings uh robberies um
low-level thefts uh sometimes violent
crime incidents uh obviously like we've
all um in in a recent homicide on the
loop uh as We were responsive to that uh
yesterday uh in in working with with W
3. Over 55 folks were contacted, 50 were
arrested and and transported to the
Pimac County Jail. Uh three folks were
were transported to the hospital and and
two were transported to treatment. Um
the challenge is from the time we
started that operation at 7:00 to the
time that we uh uh finished that
operation around 12:30, two of those
individuals that we booked had already
utilized our public transportation to
get back. Now again public you know our
transportation system is not the driver
of our of our our public health crisis
related to fentanyl. Fentanyl use
substance misuse disorders are driving
some of these things and this is just
yet another system a symptom that that
we're addressing. Um the drug activity
at bus stops. My call to action is again
to uh report we we need we we I hear it
every day. Why call the police are not
going to come. Um the officers I assure
you are being responsive and we need
that data set. We need to know uh when
the community is experiencing those
issues and we need them to call 311 and
report that and we'll make sure that
that we'll attempt to get an officer out
there as quick as possible. But we do
need that reported. Uh we are also
evaluating um um different sis systems
with different uh towns like Albuquerque
just like you, Mayor, where we're
evaluating um their transit systems,
some of the technology they're using,
where their bus drivers can communicate
directly to to police officers in the
area that circumvent and don't um don't
overwhelm a 911 system that's already
busy. And again, I would put that in the
uh sustainability and technology. And I
think I've pretty much covered the data
collection. Um that is very much a work
in progress as we discussed uh
previously that we need to make sure
that the alignment of of different
locations like our Viva location. We're
very clear that that's an area that
we're both focused on. But but when we
have those issues, how do we number
them? How do we track them? And how do
we share that data?
>> Thank you, Chief. And uh we're going to
get to the end of our presentation here.
You know, I can't go on without talking
about the work we're doing with
community safety, health, and wellness,
particularly in the Viva corridors. Um,
I think you probably saw some of those
lines on that map overlap with at least
one Viva site. And so, we continue to
work with our encampment assessors,
community enrichment coordinators, as
well as TPD to coordinate outreach
specifically around Viva sites. And then
I also want to mention briefly the
partnership we have with Prima Vera
Foundation. They have um we've actually
done a pilot program uh for outreach and
a more um detailed summary is in your
material for this item. It includes one
full-time outreach specialist, uh three
halftime staff. Um they're deployed 4
days a week at 21 bus stops and two of
our transit centers. And just some of
the stats that um they they've had the
uh ability to to do is 570 hours of
outreach. um over 300 passengers
engaged, 263
um requesting referrals for services
like emergency shelter and then 193
riders um identified as currently
experiencing homelessness. So, you know,
we're getting these folks in touch with
the right people to to re uh reach
resources. Um this annual pilot program
cost was about $121,000 and again that's
broken down in that um attachment uh
that we included. So, I want to wrap up
by talking a little bit about where we
have some opportunities to improve. I
told you I'd provide you with some after
photos. And so, these are a stark
difference from those photos I showed
you before. The top leftand corner there
is the um new and improved uh southwest
corner of Speedway in Alberon. And um
what you'll see there is um we you know,
we got a whole team together in response
to concerns from the neighborhoods. We
have folks from TPD, different
department or different divisions within
DTM as well as Suntran. And we all put
our heads together and said, "What can
we do to address the concerns at this
location?" We placed this really large
rock all around the areas that people
were uh congregating and uh loitering.
Um in this particular instance, um we
actually put up a temporary fence. That
fence is now gone, but at the time we
wanted to make sure people couldn't
access our transportation
infrastructure.
thanks to Proposition 411 that we were
going to already upgrade this
intersections uh traffic signal
equipment. So, those boxes have now been
moved out from behind the the transit uh
bus stop and that fence was taken down.
Um we did remove the bench and then we
added um it's kind of hard to see on the
screen here, but on your handout you
might be able to see off that street
light pole, we added a luminere to um
provide lighting in the evening. Um, we
also did work at all of the other three
corners of that intersection um by
placing large rock in the areas that
people were loitering. You can see there
at the southeast corner uh in front of
the speedway there um was an area where
people just were hanging out on that
wall and the rock has has helped with
that. And then I think the one that is
probably the biggest difference from the
before photo is Fort Land Country Club.
You can see that we've really cleaned up
this area. Now it's really inhospitable
to hanging out wanting to stand around
those boxes and do the things that were
occurring and it just overall looks a
lot better. Some other ideas that we
have in place is the transit center
restrooms are currently open 24 hours a
day at all three transit centers. We'd
like to propose closing those during
hours of nonoperation of the transit
service, which is 1:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m.
That way um we can preserve those
restrooms for people who are actually
using the transit centers, using the
buses. right now they are um they're
typically out of order because they're
vandalized, people barricade themselves
in there or they're just really really
in bad shape and require a lot of
cleaning. Also looking at our our
security budget, um we know that we have
some opportunities to do some
recalaboration or reccalibration of that
budget and try to target some of those
resources and some of these hotspots
that we know are challenging and and
working with our partners at TPD to
address those concerns um in a more
targeted fashion. Um I believe it was
last week we provided the mayor and
council with some information about the
deescalation training that Sunran
operators currently undergo. Um that is
something that we want to uh continue to
um explore and see if there's ways to
improve. You know, there's always going
to be conflict um between passengers and
and drivers. And so it's important to um
help address how that conflict could be
addressed um by our drivers. Um and then
we think there's opportunities to
improve on outreach coordination. We
talked about the success of the Prima
Vera program and there could be more
opportunities down the road. And then
lastly, just um making sure that we have
protocols set up to support our
operators and drivers that they can feel
safe, that they have the tools they need
to ensure that they can safely operate
the buses. Um and then to close things
out, I'll turn it over to Chad.
>> Thanks, Sam. So, just to close, without
having a a this is a complex issue. It
it it's difficult for us to come up with
a with a clear path. There might even be
countering opinions based based upon
geography and and each ward on how they
perceive or or what your constituents
want. So this is this is a really tough
challenge for us to tackle. Um so TPD is
committed to to helping our
transportation mobility partners um and
making sure that we have safe public
transportation. There will continue to
be both covert and overt operations with
undercover, that means undercover TPD
resources as well as uniform folks that
are uh around the bus stops uh and on on
corridors and bus routes that were
having um real-time communication with
Sam that we're having issues with. So,
you have my commitment that we can do
that right away. But again, I think
we'll uh next council meeting will
provide additional uh opportunity to
have conversation about scaling
technology in a responsible manner, how
we can be transparent but utilize that
technology to be smart with the with the
resources that we do have.
>> And then mayor, I do just want to end on
talking a little bit about the RTA next
investment. We've talked a lot about the
RTA at this table and uh mayor, you've
done a great job uh leading at the RTA
board and in fact um we now have the
opportunity as part of RTA next to have
some funding dedicated to safety and
security of our regional transit system.
It's included as project 51 in RTA next
and it currently allocates $51 million
over 20 years. 43 million of that is
allocated directly to the city of
Tucson. So that comes out to $2.15
million per year. And so what we did for
this item is we provided uh a rough
framework of what that could look like
if we were to split that money up and
where those investments could be made. A
lot of caveats here. This is by no means
set in stone and has a lot of
opportunity for movement. Um but just an
idea of how we might split that up is a
million dollars for additional security.
That gets us 15 additional guards that
we would likely put directly into roving
security um to have um that that those
contact points out in the system. Um an
additional half a million dollars for
maintenance and repair of our bus stops.
That would give us uh three additional
crews with six people and their
equipment. Um we could also allocate uh
$500,000 for TPD special deployments. So
having that those funds available to
help with those offduty police officers
so we can do that targeted enforcement
on the transit system. And then lastly,
we really believe given the success of
the Prima Vera program that we can
allocate some of this these dollars for
outreach support and working with our
partners at Community Safety Health and
Wellness on ways that we could um invest
$150,000 in additional outreach support.
And I appreciate you all bearing with
me. That concludes our presentation and
we are happy to answer any questions.
Thank you so much, Sam, Chief. Really
appreciate your presentation. First and
most importantly, I want to make it
really clear to our community that the
community safety is my number one
priority. I know it is my colleagues
number one priority
and um that I appreciate all of the work
that uh Sunran management and bus
drivers are uh doing to keep our riders
um safe.
um and that we understand that we must
do more uh to make sure that you know
our numbers uh in terms of crime are
going down but the perception as you
said chief is something we have to
battle with. I also appreciate it very
very much, Chief uh Casmar, that you
really are reflecting on the importance
of a bigger root cause
um that is spilling into our transit
system which is uh uh serious mental
illnesses, behavioral uh health and the
public health crisis which is fentinyl
use in our community. The root causes of
what we're seeing spill out into our
transit system, we're seeing also in our
alleys, in our parks, in our washes. Um,
this is something bigger than us. I know
that day in and day out. Our police
officers, our housing first navigators,
our community safety, health and
wellness, our operators, our security,
everyone is doing everything we possibly
can as a city to keep our community safe
and to offer resources and programs and
services that help individuals. But we
also have to recognize that the people
that are breaking the law
have to have consequences.
And so um this is part of the work that
we are doing uh and that we must
continue to do that there has to be
consequences for unlawful behavior and
it has to be paired with what this mayor
and council have been given uh direction
on which is um to make sure that we're
creating programs that are offering the
services to the most vulnerable amongst
us. But those that are denying services
and breaking the law need there needs to
be consequences attached to it. So um
I think that within the opportunities to
improve and enhance
uh we've we've got to be able to start
moving on. And the reason that I asked
for a a safety and security action plan
for our transit system is because we're
doing a lot of this work already, but
we've got to make sure that we define it
uh within the uh safety plan and then
add
uh and improve and enhance the uh
deployment of resources
uh for for these areas. So, I'm looking
forward to hearing what my colleagues uh
have to say. I know that uh Council
Member Ulik has her hand up and then
we'll go to the vice mayor uh and then
open it up for for my colleagues to add
or ask any questions. Council member
Ulik.
>> Thank you, Mayor. I I um really would
echo uh your comments and agree
wholeheartedly with the comments you
just made and want to thank the chief
and and uh director Credio and um and I
know too that our transit administrator
Mike Oglesby is really recognized
nationally and um so I was uh glad to
hear mayor that you talked about uh the
national nature of some of the root
causes of what are seeing and um just
you know uh I guess I would ask for a
couple of groups to remain engaged with
us. I think these recommendations are
sound and look forward to seeing them
implemented. Uh in addition, I know that
clearly drivers um are a critical source
of information and you know the
Teamsters Union is not only national but
international. I I'd want to hear from
them what are the best practices across
transit systems in our country. Uh you
know Tucson now has a population uh
comparable to Albuquerque, larger than
Sacramento, Long Beach, quite
significantly larger than Atlanta and
Miami, Florida, uh New Orleans, Tampa.
We're a major city and our transit
system uh is not unique in in facing
these challenges. So I guess comparative
data on what's happening on those
transit systems as well as best
practices
um uh implemented
uh would be I know useful information
that we'd all value. I also hope that
the transit advisory committee can
continue to be consulted and maybe have
a quarterly update and hear about those
best practices um and continue to work
with uh with uh uh our department
director and and TPD on um formulating
additional recommendations that that we
can uh consider in the future. Thank
you,
>> Vice Mayor.
Uh yes. Um thank you mayor and council
member Ulik for your comments and um for
um staff um with this initial transit
safety and security action plan. And I
especially appreciated um attachment A
which was a map where it makes it
obvious where we need to focus our
resources. The as has been shared, the
challenges that we're seeing are complex
from firearms, drugs, housing
instability, poverty, and mental health
crisises. And it's not going to be
solved by fairs alone. The contracted
security company reports that over 80%
of incidents occur at bus stops and
involve people not using the transit
system. I was just in Phoenix this
weekend and then I can testify even you
know in the city of Phoenix with them
having fairs I saw the same issues at
their bus stops and around the freeway
um entrances and and exits. So I think
this is a strong start and through this
discussion I want us to set a standard
for safety on our transit system. Um,
our direction needs to include a concise
implementation plan that prioritizes
the hot spots um on in attachment A,
including equity protections before any
removal of shelters, benches, and um
also builds in that stakeholder and
public engagement reporting um that
council member Ole um was commenting on.
Um Sam and Chief from the Ward One
office, we hear regularly from
constituents who feel that reporting
safety or maintenance concerns doesn't
lead to any visible action. Is there an
opportunity for us to have a dashboard
showing incident counts by category, by
stop, corridor, respon response time,
outreach, referrals, and enforcement
actions. And um I know that we um chief
you gave us a a memo back in August um
sharing some of the the calls for
service at these transit spaces that
were really um helpful, but is there a
way cuz even if you said like you I mean
TPD always um tells the community that
even if it's not like a a highle um
incident that it's important for it to
be called in because y'all are tracking
and collecting data to know to look at
trends and so that you know how to um
adapt how um how you're how you know
your the strategy behind showing up. So
that's one. The other one is there a
mechanism for Sunran to share real time
hotspot data with TPD. I know that other
cities are using transit feedback and
reviews that can be helpful in affirming
positive experiences on transit and also
flag issues on the ride. Um, we need to
continue to diversify how we're
collecting transit rider feedback beyond
calling the customer service phone line.
Um, for example, using and promoting
free tools like the transit app that's
um, widely used by transit systems
nationwide. Um, and also to enable this
real-time uh, rider feedback on a daily
basis. So, if y'all could um, answer
that for me.
>> Thank you, Mayor, Vice Mayor Santa Cruz.
I'll try to answer my portion and then
turn it over to my colleague to answer
his portion. Um, in terms of a
dashboard, I I think we need to look
into that. The the first thing that
comes to mind is uh many of our
residents are using Cclick Fix for at
least a number of transportation issues
and certainly we could expand that to
include issues um in in the transit
system. I I think we'd have to um dive
into that a little bit more before I
could give you a solid answer on that.
And then in terms of sharing real-time
information with TPD um and you
mentioned the transit app um we are in
the process u of updating our um uh
mobile application for Suntran. I don't
know if we've yet signed the contract
with the the chosen vendors. I'm not
sure if I'm allowed to to say that yet.
Um but certainly that is something we
are looking at and I I will take that
feedback back to the team to make sure
we can incorporate that with whatever
selection we make with that uh mobile
application. Chief
Thanks, Sam. Honorable mayor, vice
mayor, I I love the idea of dashboarding
so we can do a better job of telling our
story and and we certainly will um get
with our IT partners and public safety
communications to decide what
implementation would look like to to
make sure all of our systems are
communicating appropriately to better
tell our our story. So, we are certainly
up for contributing to that. your your
uh vice mayor your question about how do
um bus drivers and riders share their
experiences real time that that was the
Albuquerque app that I was referring to
that we're in the process of doing some
evaluation again I want to manage some
expectations that some of these things
cost money uh and channel my my inner
city manager that uh we'll have to
evaluate what those costs look like as
he's sitting two people to my left uh
and uh the other thing again to to
manage expectations and tie into our
last council uh conversation that
It's going to take, you know, resolution
which is still pending and with our with
our Puma County attorney and our
collaboration to see uh what exactly um
that their office is is is willing to do
with policy decisions related to our our
felony arrest u which we've
substantially increased. And then also
our city court partners as as mayor and
council have given direction to scale
community court resources. But again, I
want to manage expectations that arrest
is is only an opportunity to leverage
someone into making different decisions.
Uh but it takes that back end of the
justice system to be able to receive
those arrests and then process those and
and until we do that, we're still going
to see uh denser populations of folks um
in park in parking lots or adjacent to
businesses or at bus stops. Uh and until
we resolve that, we it will largely be
treating symptoms and not coming up with
root cause solutions.
>> Uh thank you chief for that. Um Sam,
these questions are specifically for
you. I couldn't find on this info on the
transit item, but when it comes to bus
driver passenger conflict, what are the
top three issues? Um what are the
enforcement tools or protocols that
drivers have at their disposal? Um and
in the operator survey, um there was a
concern mentioned about the ask once
policy. Could you elaborate on what that
policy entails and how it can be
evaluated for effectiveness?
Mayor, Vice Mayor, Santa Cruz, I'd be
happy to answer those questions. Um, the
top three issues that our drivers
experience um with that driver passenger
conflict are um bringing things on the
bus that they aren't supposed to. Um,
uh, poor behavior is a big one. Um, you
know, shouting, arguing, fighting, um,
sometimes even arguing with with the the
driver themselves. Um and then the third
one is um drug or alcohol use bringing
drugs or alcohol on the bus. Those are
the three uh primary the the ask once
policy. Um and I think it actually has
its root in back when we did charge
fairs. It was an ask once policy for um
if somebody came on the bus and didn't
pay the fair, you could ask once that
they pay the fair, then they then they
move on. It's also for um I'd say non um
safety related things like excuse me,
you can't bring that pile of stuff onto
the bus. That was an issue for a really
really long time. Um and you know,
sometimes people just don't um won't
listen to the driver and and they get
on. Um, when it comes to really uh major
safety issues, for example, if somebody
is smoking fentinel on the bus, um, if
there is somebody with a weapon or or or
threatening somebody, there is a
protocol in place where the drivers are
um, asked to pull over, open all the
doors, contact dispatch, contact
supervisors. Um, if obviously if it's an
emergency situation, contact 911. Um I
I'm certain there are other policies
that I don't know off the top of my
head, but we can certainly put together
um a list of those um protocols that are
in place to keep operator safety safe.
>> Okay. Um thank you. Uh when it comes um
I know that you you have taken um uh
action on some of these um problem bus
stop areas um with more um like
infrastructure wise. Um, are you um also
reallocating some of our private
security to focus on these areas in
attachment A?
>> Mayor, Vice Mayor, Santa Cruz, that
that's an excellent question and I I the
short answer is yes. We are absolutely
um you know targeting those areas. Um
the more complicated answer is we don't
have enough of them to effectively you
know address all the issues in these
hotspots. I think I mentioned before we
only have four roving security guards um
and one uh for our leapfrog unit. And so
that's why one of the strategies is can
we really look at our security budget
and figure out where do we really need
security? For example, do we really need
247 security at the south yard or can we
take some of those dollars and allocate
them to have more roving security and
targeting those hotspots throughout the
transit corridor?
>> Okay. Thank you. I um just wanted to
give um big props to council member Ulik
for um really getting this uh
co-response with Prima Vera um you know
in motion. I hope that we can continue
to see how we can you know work with
community proctoas um moving forward.
Um, and then also just again my my
comments about the the shelter bench
removal that we just also take, you
know, an equity review into account as
we're trying to figure out um just the
the implications of that. Um so with
that, mayor, I I have a motion that I
would like to make. Is can is this the
appropriate time?
>> Uh yeah, absolutely. Okay.
>> All right. So, I I move that the city
manager include the following
considerations in the transit safety
action plan that returns to Maring
Council in 30 days. Uh to coordinate the
presence of TPD and contracted security.
Prioritize hotspot stops and corridors.
Deploy transit ambassador outreach
teams. Consult with Sunran operators to
identify safety infrastructure and
operator protections.
Require written operator safety
protocols and training for Sunran
operators. Review and provide input on
the action plan with the TTAC and the
Sunran operators. Adopt and actively
promote the use of the free transit app
widely used by transit systems
nationwide to enable real-time rider
feedback. And we further move that the
city manager work with relevant and
appropriate state and local
jurisdictions for the provision of
mental, substance abuse, and behavioral
health resources for impacted
individuals.
May I have a second?
>> Second.
>> There is a motion and a second. And um
vice mayor, I just also want to make
sure that we're working with the transit
advisory committee through this process.
Um and um that we have Viva coordination
because one of the hotspots is our Viva
corridor.
Um and that we're not just leaving that
out.
Yes, mayor.
>> Okay. All righty. So, there's a motion
in a second, and I know the city manager
is wanting to jump in here.
>> Mr. Mayor,
>> honorable mayor, vice mayor, members of
the council, in order to affect that
outcome while having those coordinations
with those boards and commissions. I
would respectfully request a 60-day
deadline for that item.
>> And uh, Councilman Lee and then Council
Member Pettis.
>> Thank you, Mayor. Um, also really
grateful that we're having this
conversation and we're acknowledging the
state of what our residents are seeing
out there and have been concerned about
for a long time. And it's challenging,
right, because safety is a highly
personal thing. I could feel safe and
Kevin might not feel safe and we're in
exactly the same space. So, I understand
what we're what we're uh trying to
accomplish here. Um, between our last
two meetings, I went back to Illinois to
visit family. And as I often do, I took
the Amtrak from rural Illinois up to
Chicago. And it had never registered in
my brain before because I wasn't
thinking about transit safety as much as
we have been lately specifically. Uh,
but there were Amtrak uniform police
officers on the train and I was curious
about that. And so I did a little
research and learned that Amtrak has
their own police department. They have
500 uniformed officers that are deployed
across the Amtrak system who are able to
enforce the law. Right. And I I've heard
that some of our challenges with the
security guards is they are not able to
actually do anything except for call you
chief and say, "Hey, we have a problem.
We need an officer to come over." Um, so
that was interesting to me. I know we
can't have 500 officers but a micro idea
like that where we have a team of
uniformed officers uh which is very
expensive but if we want to uh make this
a priority that may be something we need
to explore. How can we have a team that
knows the system knows the individuals
knows the bus stops can really be
embedded into the system as its own unit
that can enforce the law when needed. Um
could is something that I'm really
interested in exploring. Um, also chief,
yes, the technology is going to have to
enable us to do more with less resource
and less people, for sure. So, that's
something I'm really interested in
looking at. Um, and again, just
understanding really the the gap. I know
I had a a meeting with Sam and Michaelel
back in May of this year to ask, if you
had a magic wand, an unlimited budget,
what would you do to improve safety? And
the issue that came up is we can have
security guards, but again, they can't
enforce anything. They can't uh do what
needs to be done out there on the
ground. So, I think that's a piece we're
still going to have to solve for and
figure out how we do that. Um, another
random story for you. Yesterday, I
stopped at CVS at Broadway and Prudence.
It was snack time, and there happened to
be a bus stop right in front of the
property, and the woman who was ringing
me up happened to be the store manager.
So, I asked her, "Does the proximity to
this bus stop have any impact on your
business?" And I got a lot of stories um
and stories that I've heard from other
businesses throughout the past several
several months. Um timing of the buses
coming in with empty bags, emptying
shelves into bags and jumping on the
buses. And that was kind of hard for me
to believe until I actually heard it um
from my for myself yesterday. So the
impact that this issue is having on
businesses is immense. I know many of us
have met with QT and they are hiring
their own security guards. They are
buying drones so that they can monitor
the amount of people that are loitering
and go send a guard out there. I mean,
that is the level that our businesses
are having to invest in technology in
their own security just to help address
the situation and make sure that their
their customers are safe when they're
going in and out of there. Um, several
folks have mentioned Albuquerque as
well. I think that um they have done a
lot with their adoption of their transit
long-term transit safety plan in
December. Really great ideas. One that I
I like when we're talking about the app
is the ability for someone to submit a
safety concern from the app kind of
privately without having to make a phone
call while they're on the bus next to
something that's happening that is um
concerning to them. So if that's
something that's not already part of the
requirements for it, I think that that's
something we should have in there. Um
the other piece, you know, the RTA next
plan, we've got 2.15 million um if
that's approved and that's not coming to
voters until March. Is that correct,
Mayor? March of next year. So, I'm I'm
thinking about what do we do in the
meantime because our community is tired
of this. Um we're we're hearing about
instances at bus stops and dumpster
fires and every single day we're hearing
something new. So, what do we do in the
meantime? Operator safety is a huge
issue, right? We saw that 70% of of
those surveyed the routes I drive don't
feel safe. 70%. Um I feel safe while
operating a bus. 75% strongly disagree
or disagree. Um I am really curious to
know from the teamsters from Suntran
specific um
inside the bus inside the system. Are
there things that we can do to help the
drivers the operators feel more safe?
And how do we get at moving those
numbers in the right direction? because
that's incredibly concerning to me and I
don't uh walk in their shoes and so I'm
not sure on a daily basis what are those
specific actionable things that we can
do to keep them safe while they're
operating the bus specifically. I would
be really curious about that. Um last
month we had the conversation on public
drug use and I and moving forward with
ideas around how we get at that. That
was one of the top issues that continued
to surface here. I know that will be
coming back up in November. Um, so I
look forward to hearing that and seeing
some draft language that we can explore
in November and start to make progress
on that front. Um, again on enforcement
needs, I would really be curious if we
could between now and and over those 60
days, Tim, evaluate the numbers, right?
We have the problematic routes, but if
we were to explore a model like Amtrak,
but at a very smaller scale, how many
folks would we need on a team that could
be embedded within Suntran to make
meaningful action on those those areas
that are in red on the map? And so
getting a little bit more clarity on
that, I think would be great. Um, and
then funding, right? All of this stuff
is very expensive. And I think the
elephant in the room for me is not to
say is charging fairs or not charging
fairs leading to the activity, but we
could look at reinstating fairs for
folks who can afford it. Like we had
scenario five um back in August that
would have had 2018 fairs reinstated
with capping and free lowincome fairs
for those who need it. That would have
brought in $8 million a year. That could
be a funding source to make the system
more safe. And that is what I am
throwing out as an idea because we have
to start taking action sooner and I hope
that RTA next passes. But what we've
seen in Albuquerque is a $7 million
budget for safety and they're still
having challenges with a much larger
budget than what we have. So I think the
system deserves to be um invested in
from a safety standpoint so that
everyone can have a good experience and
we have to pay for it. So I just wanted
to throw that out there for us to think
about. Those are my my thoughts. Mayor,
Council Member Pittis,
>> she said it best. So, I think I would
just ask um a couple of things. Uh you
had mentioned, Sam, uh an interest in
closing the bathrooms at some of the
transit centers. Is there a particular
need from d direction from us to move
that forward as a part of that motion?
>> Uh mayor, council member Pettz, um
certainly clarity would be great and
direction would be great. Um I you know
I don't know when and why the decision
was made to keep him open 247. Um I I
think we've got um the freedom to do
that administratively but if there was
any concerns with that we would
certainly want to hear that from mayor
council. the the the the
as much as you can possibly do, Sam,
that make sense that are administrative
changes that you don't need mayor and
council direction on is um the obvious
ones and I agree with Councilwoman Lee.
We can't wait till March to institute
changes. We need to do as many possible
changes as we can now to be able to
provide the safety and security both to
the drivers and uh the users of the
system. So if if closing
restrooms and the transit centers
uh according to the hours of operation
of our buses makes sense
administratively,
please go ahead and move forward with
it. The one thing that I did want to
follow up on that Councilwoman Lee um
mentioned
um that for me
doesn't make sense
is investing
with a possibility of an RTA next plan
having two.1 million a year for safety
and security is adding $1 million in
additional security
in hired security versus investing it
more in TPD
and other security measures such as
lighting for you know the the drivers
also said that lighting for the bus uh
stops possible cameras that are
connected to uh to seesark within TPD so
that we can continue um making sure that
we're especially on the hot spots. Um,
so I would suggest that we do take a
look at the RTA RTA next to start
planning, but I'm not sure if a million
dollars investing in security that can't
arrest
um
or cooperate with other um police
department units that are doing
investigative work on sales.
um might be the best investment. I'm
sorry. Um Council Member Perez, I I
don't know if you had any additional
questions or comments.
>> Nope, I think we covered it.
>> Okay, then Council Member Dah, then
Cunningham, then Ulik, and the vice
mayor.
My colleagues have brought up very good
points. So I only want to do a little
deeper dive on one that we do hear from
businesses asking for problem bus stops
or bus stops that they see as a problem
in front of their business being moved
or removed. Um um what's your thoughts
about that? Is that is that a viable
strategy? Can they be moved a block and
a half away and not cause that sort of
impact to businesses? Can we remove bus
stops and not impact um our riders
ability to get on the bus?
>> Yeah, Mayor, Council Member Dah, thank
you for that question. That question,
that request actually comes up a lot.
And um I I will say that we we don't
want to set a dangerous precedent of
just removing a bus stop every time that
we get a a question or a concern.
um moving it one way or the other could
potentially um
address the problem for a short period
of time, but it may return. The things
that we like to look at when we get
these requests is how many people are
boarding and how many are lighting at
that location. And then also the bus
stop spacing. We want to be really
cognizant of if if we remove a bus stop,
we then create a distance that's not
walkable for somebody to go to the next
bus stop. So, we have to take all of
those things into account and that um
you know that that's been and then we
also want to see what really what is the
root problem. What is the problem that's
that's being caused at that bus shelter,
bus stop and can we try to solve that
problem before um removing it? That
should really be the the last resort. Um
you know, are there just other things
that we can do to address it? So, that
that would be my only comment on that.
Um but at the end of the day, we
certainly can remove bus stops. It is.
Um I think it's up to us whether or not
we want to remove them or not. I think
the manager wants to add something.
>> It didn't It didn't sound like Did you
also mean in terms of just eliminating
the shelter, not necessarily eliminating
the stop altogether?
>> Um I bet the stop, but the shelter is
another
>> Got it.
>> Honorable mayor, members of the council,
to this very point, I believe the vice
mayor's motion includes the requirement
of an equity analysis before any bus
stop would be altered or removed. And so
we would take all of the things director
Credo brought into mind, but other
criteria that mayor and council deem are
appropriate for us to consider before we
would take an action. So I would be
strictly interpreting the motion should
it be to pass that we would not do it
without going through some level of
analysis of the impacts um on writers
and writers and and and the community.
>> Thank you both. Good answers.
Council member McCunningham,
>> this discussion
has manifested itself into a discussion
about resources.
It doesn't uh it we're getting to the
point where we're spinning our wheels in
the relevancy of all the actions we can
take if we don't have the resources to
implement them. That's the bottom line
that we've run into. We want a safe and
secure bus system. We want it to be as
vast as we can. We want it to be as
convenient as it we can. We want it to
be as safe as we can. And we have to
continue to pour resources into it when
we're projecting a $40 million deficit
next year. So, we need to get real about
what our limitations are and what the
expectations should be.
And
this piece about resources is even more
alarming when 30 years ago businesses
would beg to have bus stops put at their
place and now they're begging to have
them removed. That is not a manageable
or sustainable situation.
While it's encouraging
that
different folks said they felt safe or
different folks said they didn't safe,
if you really look at this data, there's
a bunch of neutral responses. So when
you factor in the neutral responses, one
out of 10 of our drivers feel safe
driving their bus right now. One out of
10.
You can't tell me that things are going
well when one out of 10 of your drivers
actually feel safe. Now, some of them
are neutral. They're not safe or unsafe.
But one out of 10 of our 118 responses,
which is one quarter of our drivers,
actually said they feel safe. So, for
me, that is absolutely not acceptable.
We can't be sustainable if our drivers
feel that unsafe. That is an
overwhelming response to me. And if you
look through the neutral, if you add
into the neutral responses from the 228
paper, and I'm anxious to take a look at
the online responses, it sounds like
some of the responses were skewed, but
we still have less than half of our
riders actually feeling safe.
So, we've got to really think about
whether or not this is we're in the
right direction.
We've had 15,000 incidents, security
incidents on buses. 15,000 for those
counting at home. That's over a hundred
a day. Again, some of them are nuisance
things and they're nothing things, but
still a hundred things a day. It should
be like five.
That is not sustainable.
So for me we have to think about this
holistically and we think about how are
we going to get the resources to imple
all the things that were mentioned are
good ideas
but I want to know through dollars and
cents through actual numbers of
personnel how that's going to be
effective. We we operate I think 45
routes we'd have to hire 45 officers
ideally that's four 4.64.8
8 million
and how do we raise that capital? Where
does it come from? And these are
exercises that I'm going through as
we're discussing all these things. I
mean, again, were we premature to
continue free fairs? I don't know. I'll
say this. I think that whatever fair
package, if we ever re reimplement
fairs, has to have a very, very, very
robust free system. But without having
any fairs at all, there's certain stuff
we cannot do in the other parts of the
system. We can't offer a rider choice
program for paratransit.
In Valley Metro, they have a onehour
pickup and drop off for paratransit.
We can't have that without any type of
when when you're doing a multiplier of
zero. We can't offer rider choice at
all.
Um, we can't leverage our community
partners for bulk payments where we get
the UOVA to pitch in money, where we get
Rathon to pitch in money, where we pay
for our employees to ride for free and
the the county matches us and TUSD
matches up. We have no leverage to do
that without any type of fair increase
uh fair structure. We that opportunity
is out the door. I love the dashboard
idea. How are we going to pay for it?
What are we going to run? because I
guarantee you we're going to go to a
consultant and we're going to need a
digital consultant to run a dashboard to
count incidents and we still have no
action or ability to keep people on and
off the bus. At least have a tapper that
you where you use an ID or a free pass
you can get so when you board the bus on
and off um if the driver's familiar with
somebody they can make sure they don't
get on. We've got to have some of those
things in place. The other piece is the
visibility piece, which is things that
are happening at bus stops where our
offices are getting calls every day
about the visibility of what's going on.
And so I'm thinking about those things
and I'm thinking about
I've had a I've I've I've heard everyone
say
uh you're either free fair or you're not
free fair. I'm I don't think it's like
that. I think there's a whole bunch of
people are like, "Well, if you've got a
whole bunch of free free pass stuff,
that could work. But if we're going to
do free fairs, that's fine. Let's put it
on the ballot. Let's put it on the
ballot and decide whether or not we
should have it. But we've got to figure
out how we're going to sustain this
system because right now, what we have
isn't sustainable.
This motion has a lot of caveats and
pieces and it's like a start, but I'm
probably going to bring or I want to
bring another motion uh about
the steps to uh put fairs back on the
ballot. That's the motion that I want to
bring.
And or having uh or having a tapper,
that's the motion that I want to bring.
like why we can't have a at least a door
tapper to get on and off so it's a
little bit more secure. I'm thinking
about our nine out of our 10 drivers.
I'm thinking about half of the people
who ride the bus according to these
surveys. I'm thinking about the 15,000
or 100 incidents a day we've had.
So those are the things I'm thinking
about in this discussion. I hate to be
such a downer.
Um, it was a great it's a it's a it's
good item to bring forward, but we've
got to have some realistic understanding
of how how much of a crisis this is
right now.
So, I don't have a specific motion in
mind. I wasn't really prepared for this
motion. So, for that, I don't think I'm
going to support the motion. Um, I'd
rather have some I think there's some
discussions we can have in the
administrative side because right now I
don't think anything we do in this
motion can be funded.
And so I'm going to vote no.
Um,
I wish I had a proposal for a better
fair structure, but we've got to do more
work on that and decide how it's going
to how it's going to happen. So those
are those are those are my uh comments
this afternoon. Uh thank you council
member. Uh you know a couple of things
that um that I have been observing and
everything for me it seems as though
I've been saying it and I've been saying
it for at least two three years.
The issues that we are seeing and the
chief said it and I've said it before
and I've said it today a few times. The
issues that we are seeing
on our city streets regarding serious
mental illness that is tied to
unsheltered homelessness, but it is also
tied to the public health crisis of
opioid and fentinel use. The open air
use that writers and operators are
seeing
is not pertaining as much to having a
free system as it is to the root cause
of what is happening with the opioid
fentinel
health crisis.
And what I heard as part of the motion
is to bring those jurisdictions that are
responsible
to fund mental and behavioral health
issues and um the public health crisis
of fentinel use in our community
um to the table as well because those
issues not being resolved and bringing
everyone that is responsible all of the
juris jurisdictions that are responsible
to the table. We're not we as a city are
not going to be able to
solve them and solve them alone. So, as
mayor, it is my responsibility
to bring other jurisdictions to the
table to help fund and find solutions
uh for what is happening. Never has the
city of Tucson, it doesn't include it in
our charter. It doesn't mention it
anywhere that the city of Tucson is
responsible to solve mental behavioral
health problems or substance use
disorders.
And really, that is a huge piece
of the problems we are seeing not just
in Tucson, but throughout Arizona and
throughout the country. So, I hear you,
council member, and nobody in this table
is saying that the problems that we're
seeing um are not a problem. We're all
saying it it is a problem. It is an
issue and um we have to find solutions
and fund solutions that are outside of
just us as the city of Tucson. So I
heard that in the motion. Uh so I am
going to be supportive of the motion as
we move forward throughout the year. Um
especially the fiscal year. Um, I will
be paying attention to the deficits that
we know are happening right uh on our
budget and evaluate the with the input
of our Tucson Police Department of
Sentran and its operators. I know that
Mikl Oglesby is here. he has been a
really good partner at bringing the
voice of the operators to the um the
city of Tucson and I appreciate it and I
just want you to know that we want to
continue finding solutions for what the
operators are bringing to our table.
It's not the end. It is a continuation
of uh finding solutions for what we're
seeing. So, um I know that there's some
hands up. Uh Vice Mayor, I think you're
going to um
uh be the last uh person uh to be able
to speak. We've run out of time. Uh but
this is only a continuation of the
conversation. Vice Mayor,
>> um I think I saw Council Member Ulik's
hand up before me, so I don't know if
you wanted to. Did you want to add
something?
>> Thank you. I'll be super super brief. I
I'll try anyway. Paul, you're our math
guy and I rarely even uh hazard to
pretend to question your math, but
um we have 40 incidents a day if we have
15,000
and we have 50,000 boardings a day. I'm
not making light of that and I think
there's probably under reporting. So,
I'm not going to downplay the
significance of what we're seeing, but I
agree 1,000%
with the mayor and others uh including
uh Chief Casmar. The root causes of what
we're seeing are what we ideally would
remain focused on. Uh and and fentanel
is a huge driver of what we're seeing.
Um, in terms of resources for the
system, I also just want to remind
everybody that we did identify that
Sunlink is subsidized to the tune of $7
million a year and we moved to create a
mobility enterprise in the downtown area
and to begin uh looking at parking and
the very low rates and hours of coverage
for parking that we charge compared to
other cities. like Tempe and Mesa and
Phoenix um in order to raise revenues.
So we did in fact take that and several
other significant actions in order to uh
address the gap in uh uh uh funds needed
for transit. Um I this and this is also
part of why I think comparative data is
going to be critical because the other
cities that I've mentioned that are
lower in population like Atlanta, Miami,
New Orleans, Tampa, Sacramento, Long
Beach. Uh I want to know are there
incidents higher or lower relative to
their boardings? Um they charge fairs.
Uh we could be setting operators up for
just more conflict by reinstituting
fairs because people who are high on
fentanyl or meth or you know these other
issues that we're seeing with behavioral
health um are likely to be the ones who
will be non-compliant and it puts more
on our operators. So I just want to make
sure we're thinking about unintended
consequences.
uh like with removing bus stops and
charging fairs which punish the 17
million rides uh you know the 50,000 a
day. Let's say it's 49,000
who are absolutely law-abiding
hardworking folks.
um punishing them to try and get after
uh you know the folks who we know are
really uh suffering and causing
suffering. So I guess I just wanted to
share those thoughts.
>> Vice Mayor,
>> uh thank you mayor and thank you council
member Ulik for um your your comments. I
think for this item we're talking about
the transit safety action plan. We're
not talking about fairs. Um, so I think
it's a little frustrating to kind of
conflate these two things together. Um,
we decided that if um, we were having
concerns around safety that we needed to
focus on that and figure out, you know,
what was happening in and around our
transit systems. Um it's I guess I I've
said this before, but as I'm hearing it
again about the the businesses and the
impact on the businesses, um we know the
majority of thefts and assaults are
people in cars and we're not talking
about you know going after drivers in
some way like that's the um you know
that's their gateway vehicle. Um, on the
contrary, the bus, if we have a problem
person, it makes it easier um to be able
to get them riding the bus than if they
were in their own private vehicle. Are
also private um businesses. I've had um
Sam and myself talk to private
businesses who were interested in
removing a bus stop and we engage in
dialogue with them. And a lot of times
through that conversation, what what
came up was the businesses not having
proper lighting, not having um a proper
way to um enclose
uh their areas um when they're not
operating. Um so having it more secured.
So, and even having that dialogue giving
them tools to figure out how they can
with you know infrastructure and
lighting um minimize uh that kind of um
interaction because even in I and I I
get this all the time right with our
businesses owners and why it's such an
important part of the work that we do in
Ward One but businesses are also private
they're private businesses and even when
we own our homes those are it's our
private property it's private homes and
we're the ones responsible for putting
up any kind of security measures if
we're having issues in and around in our
home and that I don't think it's any
different um for businesses. So for
somehow to make the leap that to protect
our businesses we have to charge fairs I
think is unfair in within this
conversation. So I just wanted to to add
that mayor and I hope we can you know
just keep moving this item forward. I
don't disagree with Council Member
Cunningham. Um, and we've talked about
it before that we need, you know, if
we're going to put something on the
ballot around transit, um, it's going to
need to be robust because even if we
were to go back to charging fairs and we
think that we can make $8 million back,
um, that is making the assumption that
80 close to 80% of our riders would
continue. Um, and I believe that that
would not be the case. And so we would
then um be paying huge amounts, millions
of dollars for a system serving half of
the writers that we have right now. So
those are my my two cents and I hope my
colleagues can support me on this
motion.
>> All righty. There is a motion on the on
the floor. Councilman Lee, there's a
question and then Vice Mayor, if you can
read reread um your motion.
>> That was actually going to be my
question, Mayor. And with respect to the
businesses, um, you know, I went out and
did my own work yesterday to talk to
businesses and there's a Walmart at
Speedway and Cold that literally has the
damn dog food behind glass because
everything walks out the door. So, uh,
not every business can afford to put
everything behind glass and hire
employees to unlock every shelf so that
people can just buy their goods and
services. So, I understand we're there's
a lot of there's a lot of people who are
victims of of retail theft and things
that are happening and those are very
real because those costs get passed on
to all of us. So, I think that we have
to listen to all the voices in the
community that are being impacted by
what's going on in and around bus stops.
And so, um I I would like to hear the
motion again just to make sure because I
have a few other things that I'm curious
if if they are included in the motion or
not to see if I'll support it.
Vice Mayor, can you read the motion,
please?
>> Yes. I move that the city manager
include the following considerations in
the transit safety action plan that
returns to Maring Council. And he had
said 60 days instead of 30. Um,
coordinate the presence of TPD and
contracted security. Prioritize
hotspots,
hot spots, stops and corridors. Deploy
transit ambassador outreach teams.
Consult with Sunran operators who
identify safety infrastructure and
operator protections and require written
operator safety protocols and training
for Sunran operators. Review and provide
input on the action plan um with the
with TTAC and Sunran operators. Adopt
and actively promote the use of the free
transit app widely used by transit
systems nationwide to enable real-time
rider feedback. And we further move that
the city manager move with relevant and
appropriate work with relevant and
appropriate state and local
jurisdictions for the provision of
mental substance abuse and behavioral
health resources for impacted
individuals.
>> Yeah. Question from Councilwoman Lee.
>> Um Vice Mayor, I was wondering if you
would be willing to add to um evaluate
opportunities to better protect bus
operators on the bus itself. Um I I
don't know if you mentioned that, but
would you be willing to add that to your
motion?
>> Uh for sure. I had the require written
operator safety protocols and training,
but we can add that to that.
>> Okay.
>> Could you give me the verbiage again?
>> I just wrote evaluate opportunities to
better protect bus operators. It's not
as fancy of language, but that's the
idea.
>> Okay. You said evaluate
>> opportunities to better protect bus
operators.
Yes.
>> So, um the motion maker and the seconder
um
approve of the additional language.
>> Yes.
>> Okay.
>> Your honor,
>> Council Member Cunningham,
>> if you're going to if you're going to
protect if there's evaluation protecting
bus riders, I can't v vote against that.
I'm not going to be on record voting
against that. So, I'll support the
motion, but I will say that I still
don't have confidence that we're going
to be able to fund all the things that
are going to be recommended.
>> Well, there are conversations about
funding coming in the future. It's not
the end. Council member Pettis.
>> Yeah, I would concur. I think we've
established that the continuation of
free transit will persist beyond even
just the council that we have today. Um,
I think I wanted to ask the question is,
you know, I know that we're about to
touch on RTA. Um, is there a contingency
plan? should the RTA fail that we're
already beginning to explore.
>> Uh, Mayor, Council Member Pettz, thank
you. That's an excellent question. In
fact, uh, we are actively working on an
RTA alternative service plan. Um,
because we know that, uh, just over $9
million of RTA funds u provides uh,
funding for service in the city of
Tucson uh, city limits. And so, uh,
we're actually going to prepare for two
scenarios. one where RTA next passes and
we believe there's going to be not only
continuing the current investment but an
enhancement to that and then also what
um an RTA next uh without RTA next looks
like and reducing that investment and
what those uh service impacts are going
to be to uh Sunr.
>> All righty. So if there are no
additional questions, all those in favor
of the motion as amended, please signify
by saying I.
>> I.
>> Any against? Motion carries. Thank you
so much for your work. Really appreciate
you all. uh thank you for uh bringing us
this and I look forward to continue
making sure that we have a safe city and
uh looking forward to additional uh
details about how we work the plan.
Right. All righty. Thank you, Chief.
Thank you, Sam. Really appreciate it.
All righty. So, we move on to item five.
Uh time has been set aside to provide
mayor and council an update on delivery
of 2006 RTA program and RTA next. Mr.
Manager,
>> honorable mayor, members of the council,
this is the continuation of our dialogue
about all things RTA. Uh without further
ado, here's Sam Credo.
>> Thank you, Mr. Manager and uh Madame
Mayor, members of the council. uh don't
have a ton of updates for you, but I
want to uh provide some information on
what's happened since the last time we
discussed this item. Um at that time, um
we had talked about um what the RTA next
plan was going to look like. And in
fact, um the mayor and council
unanimously voted to support the 20-year
halfsent sales tax uh plan, which
includes $2.67 billion of transportation
infrastructure investment um in uh the
city and in Pimac County. Um, since that
time, the RTA board met and on August
25th, the board approved the RTA Next
plan to be sent to the Pumac County
Board of Supervisors to call an election
in March of 2026. On September 2nd,
2025, the Pimac County uh Board of
Supervisors voted unanimously to call
that election on March 10th, 2026. And
so now um the RTA along with its
jurisdictional partners are working on
all the things that need to go into
having that election um happen in March.
In your material, I did provide you with
a timeline of all all of the activities
that are going to occur. I'm not going
to go through that in great detail other
than I am going to tell you that one of
the steps we are taking right now is
working uh diligently as uh a region to
uh define the administrative code as
well as the um policies, objectives and
procedures. Um a lot of that work was
done actually after the vote in 2006. Uh
we have a lot of lessons learned from
the first RTA and so uh we are grinding
through that every Wednesday morning to
um come up with a finalized set of
documents that are expected to be
approved by the RTA board at their
December meeting.
Now that um all of the RTA next work is
is done, if you will, we shift our
attention to our full attention, if you
will, to delivering RTA 1. We know how
important it is that uh we complete our
projects and so uh we are are are
spending a lot of time um working
through that. In fact um every two weeks
uh me and my staff meet uh all the
project managers get together and we
literally go project by project. Um but
what's different is we now have the RTA
at the table. We've invited them to
those meetings. They participate and we
try to identify if there are any
barriers to completion of the program
and we try to address those more more
proactively. Um, so we are uh working
really hard on delivering all of the
projects we have remaining. Uh, Valencia
is currently still under construction.
Grant 34 is still under construction.
I'm happy to report that downtown links
will have a ribbon cutting at the
beginning of 2026. And so, uh, I expect
that uh, we are going to, you know, show
the voters that we've made significant
progress on our projects. Um, lastly, I
do want to mention that there'll be a
number of IGAS coming your way later
this fall, including an authority to
acquire um, uh, direction from mayor and
council for grant 5 and six because
we've rek,
uh, there are, uh, over a 100, I think
over 150 properties that have to be
acquired for that. So, we'll be bringing
that to you as well as the IGA uh, with
the RTA for funding for that ride ofway.
Um, and that concludes my update. I'm
happy to answer any questions. Sam, I
wanted to add that um uh now that the
RTA plan has been approved and is moving
forward to the March 2026 ballot, we
need to continue our focus, as you said,
with the RTA one. I know that we are
working and we're in much better
communication and relationship with our
new uh PAG RTA executive director, Mr.
Ortega. Um,
I guess my question is how do we,
you know, move forward as expeditiously
as possible with the RTA1? And if
you're, you know, if you have enough
staff and are prepared to move forward
um
with the rest of RTA
uh with with the staff that you have.
>> Thank you, mayor, for that question. And
um I will tell you that our project
managers do have a lot on their plate.
Um I try to remind the RTA staff when I
meet with them that we do more than just
RTA projects. Uh we have Proposition
411, Proposition 407 among many other
things that we're doing as a department.
Um so I will tell you they have a very
full plate. Um however, we're talking
with the RTA about what sort of
opportunities are there for them to
potentially help augment our staff.
Maybe they can um lend some project
managers. We're even talking to AOT
about how they can potentially support
project delivery. The other thing we're
doing is looking at the process in
general and how can we compress some of
these timelines that are in the project
delivery process. Um, in fact, we just
met this morning to go through that. And
so, we're looking at many different
opportunities to try to streamline the
process to hopefully make it a little
bit easier on our project managers, but
definitely making sure that we can still
complete the program.
>> Thank you so much uh for that, Sam. I
think that's, you know, as we prepare
ourselves to inform the community on RTA
next, we still have to make sure that we
move forward in full speed with uh
delivering the promise to the voters um
of the RTA one projects. Also, I wanted
to report to my colleagues on the
council that at the last RTA board
meeting, I did ask my colleagues uh on
that board to add elements of
transparency and accountability that are
clear, including a citizen oversight uh
commission. Um I also asked them to
consider adding language to make sure
that the contractors
um uh we work with
uh for our TA next projects are
responsible and provide proper
classification and safe work environment
for the workers that our taxpayer
dollars are paying for. And so that
language that I provided was approved
unanimously.
um uh at the RTA board. So, I was very
happy about that. Other than that, I
don't have any anything else to report.
Um and I want to see if there's any
questions or comments from the
colleagues.
All right, seeing none, that's great.
Perfect. We move on to item six. Thank
you, Sam. Really appreciate your updates
and your work.
So, we move on to item six.
Time has been set aside for mayor and
council to discuss the possibility uh to
authorize a financial participation
agreement between the city and the
Primava Foundation for the Star Village
pilot project. Mr. Manager,
>> honorable mayor, members of the council,
um this item is uh in order to for us to
bring to fruition the Star Village
opening um which is still targeted for
October 15th. We're in the final stages
of doing the enabling agreements that
allow us to to proceed. Uh this item is
is essentially um requesting that you
approve the uh agreement with Primma
Vera as form allowing me to execute the
agreement when we get to a final
conclusion. Um because we we want to not
miss that date. Um so I'll turn it to uh
city attorney Roy Lusk to add some.
>> Thank you, Mr. Manager, honorable mayor,
members of council. So, uh, what we're
just basically looking for direction,
uh, today is just the opportunity for,
as the manager said, the opportunity for
the manager to finish the agreement,
execute the agreement so we can get it,
uh, rolling for the 10:15 date.
>> Any uh detail that you want to add that
the agreement has? And I also want to
thank uh, Tisha Tolman, CEO of the Prima
Vera Foundation, which I see here with
her staff. Uh, thank you so much for
being here. Any additional information
you want to add to the conversation?
>> Sure. Honorable mayor, mayor, Mr.
Council, I have um my colleague Chris
Avery here with me too, who has been
involved in the negotiation agreement.
He can talk more about it.
>> Good afternoon, members of the mayor and
council. You can see from the agreement
that we have provided to you that we
have most of the details worked out, but
there are still a few things that are
left. Um most of the details that we
have left to iron out relate to the
budget. There are some last minute
changes and some updates to the to that
budget and so we will include those in
the final agreement that signed by the
city manager. Um in fact we've just been
working I think as of yesterday we were
working on a newer form of the budget um
in order to get that um submitted. But
the basic outlines of the budget are
there. Most of the items that we need to
spend money for and how those percentage
will be allocated are in the budget
that's attached to the agreement. Um the
budget may change $10,000 here or there
depending on some last minute items such
as lights and climate control for the
tents, etc. Um we've got uh preliminary
drafts worked out for the procedures at
the site which are attached as an
exhibit
u a preliminary map of the layout of the
site and have worked out some of the
complicated legal issues that are
involved in the agreement most notably
um with indemnification. So, I want you
to understand in signing this agreement
that we are going to take on the
responsibility
um for any nuisance claims that arise
from this encampment. Those will be the
city's responsibility to defend. Um and
that's probably
um
going, you know, if the if the camp it
runs correctly, then we think we can
avoid those claims. of the camp is it if
if the if the camp uh is is chaotic um
then it will it will not work that way.
Um one of the things that is important
is that the there is a shortfall in the
budget and so we've we've worked on um
there are some opportunities for
fundraising in the course of the next
year and there are some opportunities
perhaps as new budget cycles come around
at the start of the next fiscal year to
make up for those shortfalls. But we've
also made sure that this budget doesn't
commit
the mayor and council to spending money
that it doesn't have. And so if there
are shortfalls in the budget and we
reach a point where the available funds
start to become uh basically one month
of expenses, then we we have the
opportunity to terminate the site early
for failure to meet the budget
requirements. But uh we think that the
agreement that you have in front of you
and that we're going to ask the city
manager sign when we get finished is a
good agreement and the project can
proceed to pace.
>> All right. Any questions council member
do?
>> Uh no questions. I'm so excited and
grateful that Prima Vera is our partner
in this. Um, it gives me a lot of
confidence and I think it gives the
public a lot of confidence that this is
going to be a well-run um, pilot project
and not a crazy homeless uh, camp that
um, is something like we see in washes
or in bus stops. Um, it's going to be
great. Um, mayor, if we need a motion,
I'd be glad to make it.
>> Brady, uh, go ahead, counciloman. I'm I
I move that we um uh proceed as asked by
the city manager to uh to negotiate this
contract and sign it.
>> There is a motion
>> and there's a second and we're going to
further discussion. I just wanted to as
well thank Primava
um and O PBLO Community Services
uh as well as Victoria Dazo for bringing
this idea forward to uh to the council.
um, Laaf Fronta and Pima County Health
Department uh, for supporting this pilot
program. And of course, I want to also
recognize
um, the continued work of Council Member
Ulik and Vice Mayor Santa Cruz as well
as Council Member Dah. Um,
again, I think that what distinguishes
all of us on the mayor and council and
our our city manager and our staffs is
that we're willing to pivot and and and
try pilots, right? We've tried uh
housing first as a pilot first when the
pandemic hit. Um, and we we saw the
numbers in terms of uh how positively it
was affecting people. We tried our viva,
our vitalization action program as a
pilot as well. It was called PNI at the
beginning and uh we have seen the
long-term transformative change that
that pilot program um has resulted in
reducing gun violence in some places
more than 80%.
And so the same way with Star Village,
uh it is uh piloting an innovative model
that is providing safety in other cities
and and we are willing to try a pilot
program. Again, um we know that there is
a limited amount of funds available to
try the pilot and uh we want to make
sure that the neighbors surrounding
um Star Village are uh comfortable and
have the ability to touch base with
Primavra Foundation and its workers and
O PBLO Community Services uh and those
of us in the city, right, to make sure
that the neighbors surrounding the
businesses surrounding are feeling
comfortable uh with the services that
are being provided at Star Village. So,
I'm I'm I'm appreciative of all the work
that's being that's been done so far.
Um, and you know, looking forward to
piloting a program that seems to be
providing a safe space to sleep um for
other cities. And uh hopefully that we
can connect those individuals that are
living on the street that are vulnerable
and need help with long-term services
because the end goal is to move people
out of living in the streets and into
much uh more long-term
uh approaches to their living situation.
So uh looking forward to that. Any any
other comments, questions on this item?
Hearing none, all those in favor of the
motion, please signify by saying I.
>> I.
>> Any against? Motion carries. Thank you
so much, Mr. Avery. Thank you so much,
Mr. Lusk and uh city manager and all of
those involved Foundation and their
workers. Thank you.
>> And mayor, if I may.
>> Yes.
>> Uh just take a moment. I want to
acknowledge assistant city manager Liz
Morales who's chatting with Ward 5
council member Rocky Perez right now.
Um, this project took a lot of people to
bring it together. It took a lot of
leadership from members of the mayor and
the council and our community partners,
but it also took that one person who was
able to bring it all together and
deliver services to our community. So, I
I want to take a moment to thank Liz
Morales for your efforts on this
project.
Thank you so much, Liz. We really
appreciate your work and your knowledge
and your guidance through through this
effort.
All righty. So, um really appreciate it.
Thank you all. We're moving on to item
seven. Time has been set aside to give
mayor and council an opportunity for
discussion and direction to matters
pending in front of the board of
supervisors.
Um Mr. manager.
>> Honorable mayor, members of the council,
this has become one of our new standing
items and for this particular meeting.
Uh we're uh we provided a written report
on these uh matters. We didn't have
anything of an immediate urgency. So, um
we don't have a verbal report for
today's meeting.
>> On this item, I just wanted to bring
attention to my request uh to Chair Rex
Scott on uh joint meeting. Um I will be
we've I've asked and we've talked about
a joint meeting with the board of
supervisors on unsheltered homeless um
uh directed conversation with the board
of supervisors and the mayor and council
since March of this year. Uh I again
requested
um that we have a joint meeting in what
was it early September, late August, Mr.
manager that we talked about broach this
subject again.
>> That's correct. Yeah.
>> And again, I requested um that we have a
joint meeting um via email. I I will for
formalize it even more with a memo to
Chair Scott and Vice Chair Allen uh that
we focus a joint meeting on unsheltered
homeless and fentinel and opioid use in
our community and how it pertains to our
work together. So I'll follow up on that
with a memo um by the end of this week.
Other commentary or observations for
item seven today?
All right, hearing none, we move on to
item eight. Time has been set aside for
mayor and council to receive an update
on state and national legislation,
regional committees, executives orders,
and direction to any associated
litigation. Mr. Manager.
>> Yeah. Thank you, honorable mayor and
members of the council. Uh yes, there is
a lot happening and um here to give us
our uh bi-weekly update on that is
Stephanie Zamore.
>> Uh good afternoon, honorable mayor,
members of the council. Um today marks
day eight of the federal government
shutdown and unfortunately I am unable
to report that clear progress has been
made toward reopening the government. Um
the Senate has now voted six times
without success in advancing the
competing uh proposals. And um this
underscores how deeply divided both
sides remain.
The House did not return to uh return to
session this week and the speaker has
indicated that he will not bring members
back until the Senate passes the House
passed continuing resolution. Um
however, the Senate remains in session.
And as I shared before, the main dispute
uh continues to center on healthcare
funding and affordable care act premium
tax credits that must be addressed or
renewed before the end of the year. Um
like I mean me mentioned previously as
well during the shutdown essential
services remain open but many federal
employees are furled
and at our local level we're closely
monitoring the uh monitoring the impact
on the city's departments and services
in the broader community and I've
reported to the council where we stand
there. Um however the longer the
shutdown lasts the greater the strain is
on everyone. And with that madam mayor
that concludes my updates and I'll hand
it back to you. Thank you so much.
>> Thank you so much Stephanie. I really
appreciate your your report. Um
I wanted to report on
not just the shutdown which is an
unsustainable situation.
Um unfortunately
the house has been on vacation
and uh wasting precious time to come to
the table to find a solution
uh for a continuing resolution.
It is also unacceptable that the house
uh majority leader Johnson has not sworn
in our duly elected representative
Adelita Grihalva. Um she was elected
overwhelmingly
by the people of Tucson. Um
and Speaker Johnson has not um sworn her
in. So we remain without a voice in uh
Congressional District uh 7 in Congress.
Uh, I recently
uh led in putting together a ma a letter
from mayors across southern Arizona
urging Speaker Johnson to act and
renewing the call uh to swear in our
duly elected representative to Congress.
Um, and just as we defend our
community's voice in Congress, we must
also defend our community's voice in
higher education education. Recently,
the University of Arizona was targeted
with a so-called federal compact that
conditions funding on political
mandates, an attempt to dictate how our
university serves our community.
um as our state's land grant
institutionally federally recognized
Hispanic serving institution and one of
the nation's leading public research
university. It plays a vital role in
advancing access, excellence, and
equity. I want to thank Council Member
Pettes and Vice Mayor Lane Santa Cruz
for bringing that resolution to this
mayor and council for consideration. Um,
I uh really
expect
uh our university's leadership to reject
this proposal and call on Arizona's
congressional delegation to join us in
defending academic freedom. Um Tucson
will always protect education
opportunity and um the future of our
community. So, thank you, Council Member
Pettis and Vice Mayor Santa Cruz for
bringing um that resolution to the
table.
Other than that, um any comments,
questions? Council member D.
>> Thank you, Mayor. I just want to expand
on your concern about our president. um
during this time he has said things that
um about our furled federal employees
and my heart goes out and I've talked to
several people I know who work for
instance for the park service who are
furled every other time people have
gotten their back pay and in fact a law
um establishing that was signed by
President Trump in his first
administration so his talking about
there'll be some people who won't get
paid and won't come back I think is
outrageous in this time of such anxiety
society for people who have been serving
our country. People who are um still in
their jobs are working their jobs
without getting paid. Um if you're
flying the TSA folks, the people who are
fighting fires um are military. They're
not going to get a paycheck. And as we
know, some people are living paychecks
to paychecks. And so the uncertainty and
and the chaos should not be put on the
backs of these working people who in a
sense are our colleagues uh as being
part of um the government the United
States. I just wanted to say that. Thank
you mayor.
>> Thank you council member. Any others?
>> Mayor,
>> Mr. City attorney.
>> Thank you honorable mayor, members of
council. Just wanted to notify the mayor
and council that pursuant to your
direction earlier this year, we we have
joined with a um a lawsuit filed against
DH DHS that was filed on the September
30th uh protecting the funding sources
that we received from from that agency
uh also related to uh improper standard
terms and conditions uh that were placed
on those funds and were we're proceeding
in that litigation.
>> Thank you so much. Anything else?
Already hearing none.
>> Real quick,
>> council member Pettis,
>> just wanted to make everyone aware. So,
uh, the Metro Education Commission is
going to bring forth or actually is
already in the process of working with
Puma County, um, to, uh, uh, change the
composition of the commission and rename
itself. Uh, Puma County is going to be
considering that and then subsequently,
uh, a similar copy will be coming forth
to mayor and counsel. So, just wanted to
make everyone aware of that as it
relates to Puma County.
Thank you so much. Thank you for the
update. All righty. With that, thank
you, Stephanie. We move on to item nine.
Does anyone have any items to remove
from the consent agenda
or the regular agenda? Council member
Do.
>> Thank you, Mayor. Um, my office has
asked for continuence of item 12, the
curleaf expansion. Not that there's a
huge concern, but we haven't had a
chance to talk with the uh the business
about this request. Thank you.
>> Thank you. Any others? Right. Hearing
none, we move on to item 10. Does anyone
have any items for future agendas?
Right. Hearing none, we are adjourned.
The regular study session will start at
um 5:40
so that we can give a a nice break in
between. So, we'll start at 5:40 and and
we will start with uh PHA meeting and
then the regular meeting. With that,
thank you so much. Have a nice break. Um
stretch your legs and then we'll see
here at 5:40. Thank you.
Hey, hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Heat. Hey, Heat.
[Laughter]
[Music]
Hey, hey, hey.
Baby,
baby.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
Hey.
Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Heat. Heat. N.
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey.
Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey, hey, hey.
Oh,
[Music]
hey.
down.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey, hey, hey.
Hey,
[Music]
hey, hey.
Hey. Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Heat.
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
[Laughter]
Hey, hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Baby,
hey.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Heat
up
[Music]
Hey. Hey. Hey.
Heat
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
Hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey,
hey, hey,
[Music]
hey.
ground.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey.
Heat. Heat.
[Music]
Come on.
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
Hey,
[Music]
hey, hey.
Hey, hey, hey.
Heat.
[Music]
Hey.
Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Hey, hey, hey. Heat.
Hey, Heat.
[Music]
Hey.
Hey. Hey. Hey.
[Music]
The meeting of the board of
commissioners of the city of Tucson
public housing authority will stand in
session.
For the record, council members and vice
mayor Santa Cruz will do this meeting by
teams.
Miss clerk, let's go to roll call.
Commissioner Santa Cruz
>> here.
>> Commissioner Cunningham
>> Commissioner Dah
>> here.
>> Commissioner Lee
>> Commissioner Fimris.
Oh, I'm sorry.
>> Commissioner Perez.
>> Commissioner Ulich.
She's online. Commissioner Hawkins here.
>> Chair Romero
>> here. Oh, she's
>> there. She is here. And we're having a
little bit of difficulty with the audio.
>> Yeah.
>> So, uh, let's make sure that we're
audible.
Okay.
>> All righty. Let's go to item two, public
housing authority write off
uncollectible tenant accounts receivable
approval. Before we go, we um get a
motion for this item, I just want to
welcome our new commissioner, Miss
Tristan Hawkins. Thank you so much for
your willingness to serve with us.
>> Absolutely. Thank you.
>> Okay, let's go to item two.
City manager PHA communication number 19
dated October 8th is received into and
made part of the record. Miss clerk, you
are requested to read resolution PHA
2025-46
by number and title only. Resolution
number PHA2025-46
relating to public housing authority
authorizing the write off of 335,75628
of certain uncollectible tenant accounts
receivable and declaring an emergency.
>> What is the board's pleasure?
Mayor, I move to pass and adopt
resolution PHA2025-46.
>> So, there is a motion. May I get a
second, please?
>> Second. I don't think the mics are
working though. Ask them to check them.
And we're checking on the mics.
>> There is a motion and a second.
Any further discussion on this item?
Hearing
none, let's go to roll call.
Commissioner Santa Cruz.
>> I.
>> Commissioner Lee,
>> Commissioner Cunningham.
>> Hi.
>> Commissioner D.
>> I.
>> Commissioner Perez.
>> Commissioner Hawkins.
>> I.
>> Commissioner Ulik.
>> Chair Romero. I. The motion to approve
resolution PHA 2025-46
passes by a vote of 80.
Item three, public housing authority
fiscal year 2025 annual review. City
managers PHA communication number 20
dated October 8th is received into and
made part of the record. Uh what is the
board's pleasure?
>> Your honor, I'm not sure if this
requires action, but it's it says me.
So, do I need to make a motion to accept
the review?
>> All righty. There is a motion.
>> Second.
>> There's a motion and a second. And I
don't know we were we going to have a
presentation for this item.
Anekka, director of the housing
community development department will u
present before we um do a roll call.
>> Yes. Good evening, Chair Romero and
board of commissioners. So, I'll keep
this brief, but in my ongoing quest to
continue to improve communication to the
public housing authority board of
commissioners, we've started our monthly
memos to you that you receive each
month. And then we also wanted to
provide this annual snapshot to you
based on last year's fiscal year. And so
very quickly, um,
our biggest program under the public
housing authority is the housing choice
voucher program. And so last fiscal
year, we administered over $52 million
in housing assistance payments on behalf
of participants to area property owners.
And that administered over 5,000
vouchers to Tucson and Pumac County
families. Um, there are currently 41,000
people on the wait list.
Another large program under the public
housing authority is our public housing
program. We have provided housing to
around 1,200 families. That number is
down slightly from the year before and
that is mostly because of taking a lot
of units offline at Tucson House in
preparation for the renovation of the
Tucson House. Our occupancy
rate was about 97%.
That was also down just a smidgen based
on a change in practice that HUD uh made
this past year. and we're still still
really figuring out the timing on when
we submit those approvals.
In terms of our public housing capital
fund, I will thank deputy director Jason
Thorp who really made sure to overhaul
the capital fund program this past year.
So, we spent over $3 million in capital
fund monies to improve over 205 units
and also make some long needed
improvements such as two vans for our
housing techs that drive all over the
city.
We have two self-sufficiency programs.
One is the family self self-sufficiency
program. And to be honest, Commissioner
Hawkins can speak to this better than I
can, but we have over 115 households on
the FSS program and with an average
escrow savings of $13,000.
This past year, we also relaunched the
resident opportunities for
self-sufficiency program. So, this is a
program. We have our resident services
team at the Tucson House, but our Ross
coordinator provides services to other
public housing sites besides the Tucson
House.
And then very importantly, financial
considerations.
Our public housing finished the fiscal
year in the black for the first time
since 2020.
So, there was a lot of effort made and
of course that does come at a
consequence. We are we still have too
many units offline. That's something
we're working really hard to change, but
it's a trade-off in working within the
budget and um hiring contractors to make
sure those units come online.
Um we were in shortfall on our housing
choice voucher payments, which means we
um projected to be by the end of the
year having our budget fully expended.
Good news is right before the government
shutdown, we were notified we did
receive some shortfall funding. So, we
do think we'll finish the year right
about on track. And then last, and I
think this is really important, we're
continuing to work on the asset
repositioning of our units from public
housing to a voucher platform to really
ensure the long-term sustainability of
the PHA.
And so, that's all. Happy to answer any
questions, but just wanted to provide
that overview of last year.
>> Any questions or comments from the
commissioners?
All
>> righty, hearing none. I think there is a
motion on the floor and a second. And
this is going to actually be a voice
vote. So, all those in favor of the
motion, please signify by saying I.
>> I.
>> I. I.
>> Any against? Motion carries. Move on to
item four,
public hearing, approval of updates to
the housing choice voucher
administrative plan. City managers, PHA
communication number 22 dated October
8th is received into and made part of
the record. Miss Clerk, you are
requested to read resolution PHA 2025-47
by number and title only.
Resolution number PHA 2025-47
relating to public housing approval and
adoption of the board of commissioners
of the city of Tucson public housing
authorities update to the house housing
choice voucher administrative plan and
declaring an emergency.
>> What is the council's board's pleasure?
>> Madam Mayor, I move to pass I move to
pass and adopt resolution PHA 2025-47.
Second. There is a motion and a second.
Any further discussion on this item?
Hearing none, we do need to go to roll
call.
>> Commissioner Dah
>> I.
>> Commissioner Cunningham.
>> Hi.
>> Commissioner Hawkins.
>> I.
>> Commissioner Perez.
>> Commissioner Lee.
>> I.
>> Commissioner Ulik.
>> Commissioner Santa Cruz.
>> I.
>> Chair Romero.
>> I. The motion to approve resolution PHA
2025-47
passes by a vote of 80. Item five,
public hearing, approval of updates of
the 2025 PHA annual plan. City managers
PHA communication number 18 dated
October 8th is received into and made
part of the record. Miss Clerk, you are
requested to read resolution PHA 2025-45
by number and title only. Resolution
number PHA 2025-45
relating to public housing approval and
adoption of the board of commissioners
of the city of Tucson public housing
authorities updates to the public
housing authority annual plan and
declaring an emergency. What is the
board's pleasure? Mayor, I move to pass
and adopt resolution PHA 2025-45.
>> Second.
>> There is a motion and a second. Any
further discussion?
Hearing none. Let's go to roll call.
Commissioner Lee,
>> I.
>> Commissioner Dah,
>> Commissioner Perez,
>> I.
>> Commissioner Hawkins,
>> Commissioner Ulich,
>> I.
>> Commissioner Santa Cruz,
>> Commissioner Cunningham,
>> I.
>> Chair Romero,
>> I. The motion to approve resolution PHA
2025-45
passes by a vote of 80. Item six,
approval of minutes. City managers PHA
communication number 21 dated October
8th is received into and made part of
the record. Is there a motion to approve
the minutes of the August 6th, 2025
meeting?
>> So moved. Second.
>> There is a motion and a second. Any
further discussion?
Hearing none. All those in favor, please
signify by saying, "I
>> I."
>> Any against? Motion carries.
Item seven, adjournment. The meeting of
the board of commissioners is adjourned.
The mayor and council will now convene
our regular meeting. Thank you so much,
uh, Commissioner Hawkins. Really
appreciate your service.
>> Thank you so much.
>> Thank you.
Council will now stand in session. Let's
go to roll call.
>> Mr. Cunningham
>> here.
>> Mr. Pettis
>> Mr. D
>> here.
>> Miss Sulik
>> Mrs. Lee here.
>> Vice Mayor Santa Cruz
>> here.
>> Mayor Romero
here.
>> Before we go into item two, the city
attorney will go over the rules of
decorum for a mayor and council meeting.
Mr. Attorney.
>> Thank you, Mayor, members of council.
Arizona's open meeting laws provide that
members of the public may attend and
listen to the proceedings during
tonight's public meeting of the mayor
and council. Arizona law also allows the
mayor and council to enforce rules and
procedures for public attendance of the
meeting to ensure orderly behavior and
to prevent unnecessary interference with
the public meeting. Here are the rules
that apply. The rules require decorum
and orderly conduct by the members of
the audience. No person attending the
meeting shall engage in conduct that
disrupts or otherwise impedes the
orderly conduct of the meeting,
including any statements or conduct that
interrupts the persons who might be
addressing the mayor and counsel or that
disrupts the discussions of the mayor
and council. The mayor has the authority
to ensure compliance with the rules of
orderly conduct. If disorderly or
disruptive conduct continues after a
warning, and this is that first warning,
the mayor may direct the removal of
persons from the chambers and or
reassess the meeting itself. If
disruptive behavior makes it necessary
to clear the chambers, the persons who
disrupt the meeting will not be allowed
to return to the chambers for the
remainder of tonight's meeting. As a
final note, please be aware that
interfering with or preventing this
lawful public meeting from being carried
out in an orderly manner not only
violates the rules of participation, but
also violates Title 13 of the Arizona
Revised Statutes.
>> Thank you, Mr. Attorney. Uh we will now
go on to item two, invocation, pledge of
allegiance and appointments to boards,
committees and commissions. The
invocation will be given by pastor Bruce
Bakeman, gospel of ro of gospel rescue
mission. After the invocation, I will
ask you to remain standing for the
pledge of allegiance.
Madame Mayor, uh, commissioners and, uh,
city staff members, let us pray.
Our gracious heavenly father, we're so,
um, we're so honored that you've given
us this beautiful city of Tucson to live
in, to dwell in, to work in, to raise
our families in, God, to be stewards of.
and we just thank you for this
opportunity to come together
collaboratively
uh to work together to make this city
the best it possibly can to be a shining
star for the state of Arizona and for
this wonderful country that we live in.
Father, I just pray a hedge of
protection upon every family that's
represented in this building tonight. I
pray a hedge of protection. I pray for
health and prosperity and peace. Uh
Lord, for your grace to shine above all.
God, I just pray those uh the
commissioners and the mayor and the
staff that you'd grant them the wisdom
and direction uh to take care of the
city matters and the business uh grant
them health. Lord, be with them Lord as
they they go about their daily jobs and
making this a wonderful place to live, a
wonderful place to dwell. God, we thank
you Lord that we come together Lord to
to all want to do the same thing and
that is to make this place better for
all of us. God, we thank you and praise
you in Jesus name. Amen.
>> Amen.
To the flag
of America and to the republic for which
it stands. One nation under God,
indivisible with liberty and justice for
all.
>> Thank you, Pastor Beman, for gracing us
with your words and with your presence.
All righty, we will move on to item 2 C
which are the presentations. We'll have
a few and I'll invite my council
colleagues if you want to join me for
any one of them. Uh our first
proclamation is to proclaim October 2025
to be domestic violence awareness month.
Uh our second proclamation will be um
declaring October 16th to be imagine a
day without water. And then our third
proclamation will be to proclaim October
11th, 2025 to be the Tucson
International Day of the Girl.
I'm going to go down there and then call
our guests to join us.
And if you'd like to join me, please
feel free.
our guests who are here from domestic
violence awareness for domestic uh
violence awareness month. Uh please join
me if you can. Anna Harper the CEO of
Emerge, Karina Vay from Emerge as well,
Jose Romero, all staff uh from Emerge.
Uh Caitlyn Monke from Southern Arizona
Center Against Sexual Assault. Larry
Starks to Sanjunth Festival. Lance Meeks
from Goodwill Industries of Arizona,
Beatatrice Sanchez, Padia Consul, Mexico
Tukon, and any others who would like to
join us uh for this proclamation, please
join us up here. And we have a
beautifully framed one for you. There
you go.
And then we have a a
extra one just in case anyone else wants
to take it.
Alrighty. So, um, on behalf of the city
of Tucson and the office of the mayor,
I'd like to, uh, declare October 2025 to
be domestic violence awareness month in
our community. Thank you all for being
here and all of the work that you do,
the very important work and providing
services
uh, to the families that need it. uh and
needed in the most vulnerable time in
their lives. So whereas domestic
violence occurs in epid epidemic
proportions across the United States
affecting more than 6 million people
each year and whereas October is
domestic violence awareness month across
the United States as signified by the
wearing of color purple
um to remind people that we must stop
this dangerous and deadly epidemic. And
whereas domestic abuse causes untold
trauma to children and adults in our
community and harms families physically,
emotionally, and economically. And
whereas what began as a grassroots
movement in August of 1975
with the Tucson Center for Women and
Children has evolved into comprehensive
survivor centered organization dedicated
to fostering healing, safety, and
liberation for all. This year, Emerge
celebrates their 50th anniversary by
reflecting on their journey, honoring
the voices of survivors, and reaffirming
their commitment to a future free from
violence led by hope, resilience, and
transformation.
Whereas in 2024, 5,345
individuals experiencing domestic abuse
receive services at Emerge. 12,782
emergency shelter bed nights were
provided to families and wraparound
services were offered to victims. 95% of
participants shared their safety
improved after receiving services from
Emerge. And whereas in 2024, the Tucson
Police Department and the Puma County
Sheriff's Department received more than
16,000
domestic violence calls and documented
over 7,500 incidents. And whereas Emerge
Center Against Domestic Abuse, the city
of Tucson, TPD, Community Safety, Health
and Wellness, and other partners are
committed to a comprehensive response to
end domestic violence in our community.
Now therefore, I, Rahina Romero, mayor
of the city of Tucson, Arizona, do
hereby proclaim the month of October
2025 to be domestic violence awareness
month and encourage our community to
wear purple clothing or a purple ribbon
to stand in solidarity with domestic
abuse victims. and witness whereof I
have here unto set my hand and caused
the seal of the city of Tucson, Arizona
to be affixed this eth day of October
2025. Thank you so much for your service
to our community. We appreciate what you
do.
[Applause]
Thank you so much, Mayor Romero, uh,
Vice Mayor Santa Cruz, and members of
the council. Um, on behalf of the 28
adults, 34 children, one dog, and one
cat currently residing in our shelter,
and the thousands of other individuals
and families served by Emerge each year.
We are humbled to accept this
proclamation and receive it as a
statement of continued support from the
mayor and council of the city of Tucson.
Last fiscal year, we received 4,488
calls to our hotline.
123 adults, 138 children lived in our
shelter.
2,235
people access support in our
community-based sites.
306 men in this community engaged in our
men's education program working to learn
how to be safer in their relationships.
And as a part of the firearms technical
assistance project at Tucson City Court,
212 victims were connected to a
high-risisk advocate.
174 firearms were turned in and some 449
prohibited possessors were recorded in
the NYX system.
Embedded in these numbers, 2,32
referrals came to emerge from local law
enforcement agencies, 92% of which
originate from the Tucson Police
Department. 76% of those referrals were
people who were at high risk of being
seriously harmed or killed. This
proclamation honors that there is a life
behind each one of these numbers and
statistics.
And as we near the close of our golden
anniversary, 50 years of service to our
community, our work remains as urgent as
ever.
We are grateful for our many supporters,
contributors, and volunteers who have
allowed us to sustain our work.
And we extend our deep gratitude to our
partners at the Center against Sexual
Assault, Goodwill of Southern Arizona,
the Junth Festival Committee, the city
of Tucson's community safety, health and
wellness program, and the consul de
Mexico, an indivisible tono. Your
steadfast belief in our shared mission
continues to strengthen the foundation
of a safer and more compassionate
community.
Now more than ever, we need the support
of our community to sustain this
critical work. We invite you to join us
for our second annual Footsteps for
Healing Walk to be held at Reed Park on
Saturday, October 18th from 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 p.m.
This walk and community gathering
centers survivors, families, and
neighborhoods in a shared commitment to
end violence.
Let us walk side by side in a powerful
statement of unity, resilience, and
love.
Domestic violence, gun violence, sexual
assault, transphobia, racism, and
violence against tribal communities are
deeply interconnected.
Together, they form a complex web of
harm that touches every corner of our
community. As we move forward, we honor
all who have been affected and lift up
the truth that healing and safety are
born from community.
Yeah,
[Applause]
I'm going to just put this here.
Thank you.
[Applause]
>> All righty. Our second proclamation is
proclaiming October 16th as imagine a
day without water awareness
proclamation. And I'd like to have our
Tucson water director John Kimik and
invite others community groups to join
us. Pas Pascoyaki chairman Julian
Ernnandez. Uh Fatima Luna the city's uh
chief resiliency officer. Karina
Martinez community relations
coordinator. Katie Ganon the executive
director of Tucson Clean and Beautiful.
Lisa Shipek executive director at Wan
Watershed Management Group. Rory Junman
representing SEWAC, Kate Hutton, the
Coalition for Sonor and Desert
Protection, and representatives that are
here with us from Sierra Club Noales
Group, Vanessa Ggo, Jobs with Justice
and Green Storm Water Infrastructure
Initiatives, and any others that would
like to join us up here. All righty. So,
I don't know if we have
Ah, there it is. You get a framed one,
too. And then
if you'd like to hold this,
this is an extra one.
All righty. So, thank you so much for
joining us. What you do is incredible
and uh really appreciate the work uh and
bringing attention to the importance of
water in our community. Whereas uh the
city of Tucson recognizing recognizes
imagine a day without water as a
national day of action as part of the
value of water campaign created to
highlight the value of water in our
daily lives and the systems that deliver
it. Encouraging residents, businesses
and policy makers to reflect on how
independ indispensable water is to our
health, environment and economy. And
whereas safe, clean, reliable, high
quality water is essential to the health
and well-being of tonins, the
environment, and our local economy
sustained through sound planning,
investment in resources, and
infrastructure management. And whereas
the city of Tucson adopted the onewater
2100 plan, an integrated water resource
manage management strategy, committing
to resilience, equity, stewardship, and
quality of life by diversifying water
supplies, promoting water reuse,
advancing sustainable infrastructure,
and preparing our future for
uncertainties through community
inclusive scenario planning. Whereas
imagine a day without water aligns with
national efforts to emphasize the
critical connection between strong water
systems and a thriving economy from
restaurants to hospitals and technology
companies. And whereas the city of
Tucson is committed to advancing water
equity, engaging with underserved
neighborhoods and marginalized
populations to ensure fair and reliable
water service for all. And whereas
Tucson Wat's dedicated staff of more
than 500 employees, two water systems
operate four groundwater recharge
facilities maintain over 4,600 m miles
of portable water pipeline and nearly
200 miles of reclaimed water pipeline
and provide service to more than 750,000
people across Tucson and six surrounding
communities. And whereas Tucson Wat's
commitment to protecting public health
and the environment began with a
conservation approach to water quality
management and consistently meeting and
exceeding all applicable regulations.
And whereas the city of Tucson's
reclaimed water system has provided a
renewable supply to meet non-potable
demands such as irrigating parks,
schools, golf courses, and university
facilities. helping to conserve portable
supplies for drinking water needs since
1983.
And whereas a reliable water supply is
fundamental to maintaining Tucson's
economy and overall quality of life and
Tucson's water proactive supply planning
aims to minimize the impacts of drought,
climate change, and regional water
supply challenges. And whereas imagine a
day without water provides an
opportunity for elected officials,
community leaders, businesses, and
residents to come together to raise
awareness, foster collaboration, and
reaffirmed our shared responsibility to
safeguard water resources for future
generations. Now therefore, I, Raa
Romero, mayor of the city of Tucson,
Arizona, do hereby proclaim October 16,
2025 to be imagine a day without water
in the city of Tucson and encourage all
of the residents, businesses, and
community organizations to participate
in activities and conservation that
highlight the value of water, the
importance of investing in resilient
water infrastructure, and the essential
work of our water professionals. I
further urge that the these efforts
align with the guiding principles of the
city's onewater 2100 plan, our long
range integrated water resource strategy
designed to ensure resilience, equity,
stewardship, and quality of life for
generations to come. Through
collaboration, innovation, and shared
responsibility, we can ensure a
sustainable water future where no one in
Tucson ever has to truly imagine a day
without water. In witness whereof, I
have here unto set my hand and cost the
seal of the city of Tucson, Arizona to
be affixed this 8th day of October,
2025.
Congratulations for all of the work that
you do.
[Applause]
And after all of those words that I had
to say, I do need some water.
Would you like to add something? Anyone
of you, please? You're always welcome.
Yes, Lisa.
>> Thank you, Mayor Romero and council
members. Uh what a wonderful
proclamation. I'm Lisa Shipek with
Watershed Management Group and I just
want to acknowledge uh that water is
sacred and we especially feel that here
in the Sonor and Desert. Water is so
sacred and we each have a role in
stewarding our local waters, our creeks,
our rivers, our springs, our aquifers,
our rainwater, our storm water and we
have such a wonderful uh conservation
ethic here in Tucson. But I really want
to acknowledge as well that these sacred
waters have been stewarded since time
immemorial by the indigenous communities
that have been here and we have so much
to learn from them to get back to that
way of stewarding our waters once again.
So this is part of that effort and just
thank you to all the organizations to
some water everyone who's working to do
that.
[Applause]
Thank you, honorable mayor, members of
council. I just want to also point out
I'm John Kami, director of Tucson Water.
So, uh, on behalf of the more than 500
employees at Tucson Water who absolutely
love what we do, making sure that
everybody in this community has safe,
reliable access to water 24/7, 365. Um,
I want to personally thank all of the
Tucson Water customers. The Tucson water
customers are some of the best customers
in the country, if not the world. Uh
we've demonstrated how you can survive
and have sustainable living in the
desert and maintain a large water
portfolio for generations to come. So,
uh on behalf of the utility, uh thank
you to the Tucson Water customers for
being awesome. Thanks.
[Applause]
>> All righty. I wish I had water for all
of you guys, but I did have to drink a
little bit of water after all that. Can
we take a picture before you leave? Yay.
Thank you for all the work you do, by
the way.
>> Thank you.
Thank you very Thank you.
Thank you so much. Alrighty. And our
last but certainly not least, uh we're
proclaiming October 11th to be the
Tucson Day of the Girl and would like to
invite our uh guests. Uh Christine
Garcia Arnandez, CEO of the Girl Scouts
of Southern Arizona, Asus Bravo, CEO of
Mini Pod Rosas, and the young women and
their parents that are here with us to
celebrate the day of the girl. Please
join us. uh up here.
And we have an we have a few extra ones
actually.
>> Yeah, we have some space over here on
this other side.
Anyone else? Alrighty.
Alrighty. So, on behalf of the city of
Tucson and the office of the mayor, I'd
like to proclaim October 11th to be
Tucson Day of the Girl in Tucson.
[Applause]
>> And I'd especially like to thank uh
Council Member Ro Perez for bringing to
the attention this proclamation and
putting it all together for us. uh
whereas the international day of the
girl observed globally on October 11th
celebrates the voices, dreams and
leadership of girls and young ladies and
reaffirms the importance of a world
where every young lady can thrive. And
whereas the city of Tucson recognizes
that empowering girls and young ladies
strengthens the entire community by
fostering education, leadership,
confidence, and civic engagement. And
whereas Tucson is home to a vibrant
network of organizations supporting
growth, including Minip Rosas, which
mentors girls and young ladies from
diverse backgrounds through confidence
building, leadership cultivation, and
educational opportunities. And the Girl
Scouts of Southern Arizona, which
prepares participants with skills in
civic engagement, entrepreneurship,
outdoor stewardship, and life readiness.
And whereas through workshops,
mentorship, summer camps, and community
events, mini pod de Rosas equips its
minis with social emotional skills,
career exposure, and support for future
success. While the Girl Scouts of
Southern Arizona continues its legacy of
building courage, confidence, and
character through hands-on learning and
community service.
And whereas the city of Tucson, Arizona
commends the efforts of Minip Rosas and
the Girl Scouts of Southern Arizona and
all organizations advancing the
empowerment of girls and young ladies,
ensuring each can envision her future,
embrace her power, and step confidently
into leadership. Now I Now therefore I
Rahina Romero, mayor of the city of
Tucson, Arizona, do hereby proclaim
October 11th, 2025 to be the Tucson Day
of the Girl and encourage all residents
to support the empowerment of girls and
young ladies today and every day. In
witness whereof, I have here unto set my
hand and cost the seal of the city of
Tucson, Arizona to be affixed this 8th
day of October, 2025.
Congratulations.
[Applause]
And
I would like to invite you to say a
couple of things and invite the girls to
also comment if they'd like to, but
Ariana has
>> perfect.
Um, good evening, mayor, council. Um, I
am honored to stand before you today. I
received this proclamation on behalf of
our participants, their families, and
board members of Minip Rosas, which we
have two today.
[Applause]
Every year, we honor this day by having
an event dedicated to girls and young
ladies called a day in my uniform. On
this day, we come together as a
community and inspire youth.
International Day of the Girl is a
global movement on which to celebrate
girls everywhere, amplifying their
voices, actions, and leadership.
It is a day that belongs to everyone who
cares about girls and their rights. On
this day, we come together to recognize
and advocate for the full spectrum of
girls rights. I want to say thank you
for joining Girl Scouts and Mini Pod
Rosas on this movement. It takes a
village. It really does.
And today we honor and stand for all of
the injustices still happening today
with girls in developing countries.
We will continue to advocate. Our
organization has young leaders already
doing so. We have our officers here that
are learning already how to advocate.
Um, we stand united to every girl in
this world. Um, gracias.
[Applause]
>> Thank you, mayor and council members,
uh, for it is an absolute honor to have
you guys support and invest in the Girl
Scouts, and it is truly great. It's
amazing that you allowed us for us to be
here to celebrate this proclamation. It
is such an honor because we are the
members of Tucson and we live here and
it's just an amazing opportunity to have
you guys um do this for us. Thank you so
much.
>> Amazing. Thank you so much.
[Applause]
>> Hello. Thank you, Mayor and Council. I
just want to add um I'm here my name is
Allison. I'm a program manager at Girl
Scouts and I'm here on behalf of Kristen
Hernandez who's very sorry that she
could not be here. So, thank you for
lifting up girls in our community and
supporting Girl Scouts, Mini Ponder
Rosas, and all of the other uh girl
focused organizations in our community.
And I also would like to extend um an
invitation to our entire city, our
community um and southern Arizona in
general. We are celebrating our 90th
year as a council. So that's 90 years of
impact, 90 years of girls of courage,
confidence, and character. And we are
celebrating with Scoutchella, a music
festival in December. Um, so come on
down. It's open to everyone. Come learn
about Girl Scouts. Celebrate with us.
Hang out with us. It's going to be
great.
Thank you.
I just want to say thank you um to the
mayor and to the council people um for
this proclamation. We are very very
grateful and I just want to say thank
you to Asus Senna because without many
ponderosas I don't think I would have
found my voice um this earlier and I
have learned to advocate for myself and
to be a leader. So I just want to say
thank you to all of you and you all are
so sweet. So thank you.
[Applause]
I wanted to make thank you all. I wanted
to make sure that you all went home with
something. So, we also got you each
certificates. Um, I can do uh is it
aisana?
>> Aisana. Aisana Jimenez. Yeah, you get
back over here. There you go. And then
we got Delaney.
Is it Ayali?
>> Alali. There you go.
And then Sophia. It's right there.
And then Kianne.
>> You go. And then Holly. Yeah. Holly.
Holly.
>> Holly.
>> Holly. All right. There you go.
>> Yeah. Um on October 11th, we are having
an event at Tucson um
>> Puma Community College
>> Pum I mean Puma Community College um
campus and we're inviting everybody out
in the community.
Um
>> 10 a.m.
>> and another guy.
[Applause]
And that was it.
>> And we move on. Thank you so much
everyone that attended that got uh came
for the proclamations. Really appreciate
your work in our community. We are going
to move on to item 2D,
appointments to boards, committees, and
commissions.
>> City managers communication number 312
dated October 8th is received into and
made part of the record. May I have a
motion to approve the appointments in
the report, please?
>> So moved, your honor.
>> Seconded.
>> Second. There is a motion and a second.
I would like to thank uh those willing
to serve in our commissions and
committees uh for your willingness to
serve the city of Tucson.
>> So um is there any further discussion on
this item?
Hearing none. All those in favor of the
motion please signify by saying I.
>> I.
>> Any against? Motion carries. Are there
any personal appointments to be made at
this time?
All righty, seeing none, we move on to
item three. Mayor and council report,
summary of current events.
>> City managers communication number 310
dated October 8th is received into and
made part of the record. This time has
been scheduled to allow members of the
mayor and council to report on current
events. These are to be current events
of activities within the community, not
position statements on policy issues.
Does any council member have anything to
report at this time?
All righty. Any um joining us virtually?
>> Yes, mayor.
>> All righty. So, we'll start with the two
virtual colleagues and then start over
here on the dance. Vice Mayor,
>> thank you, Mayor. So, on Monday, October
13th from 2:30 to 10 p.m., the community
is invited to attend Indigenous People's
Day 2025, planting seeds of change. This
free event will take place on 26th
Street between 6th Avenue and 4th Avenue
and will feature food, local vendors,
performances, and educational speakers
celebrating the history and resilience
of indigenous people. And then on
Wednesday, October 15th from 3:30 to
7:00 p.m., PBLO High School will host
their Warrior Block Party, a
family-friendly gathering highlighting
Coma, Musika, and Kulura. The event is
open to all ages and will feature
entertainment, food, and cultural
activities organized by PBLO's
culturally relevant uh program. The
locations at PBLO High School, 3,500
South 12th Avenue. And then finally, on
Sunday, October 12th at 8 a.m., join um
our office hosting our second Sunday DC
Burrito's ride with Fuga. This is a free
mobility event um with a a bike share
from um Tugo Bikes and Bimburitos from
Los Harritos. Thank you.
>> Thank you, Vice Mayor. Council member
Oul, did you have any current events?
>> No announcements. Thank you, Mayor.
>> Thank you, Council Member Cunningham.
>> I only have one announcement.
Um
there's a we're probably gonna make this
announcement and then get no rain, but
I'm gonna make it anyway. Uh so
Hurricane Priscilla's course, Hurricane
Priscilla is currently about oh 100
miles off the coast of um where Cabo San
Lucas is. It's heading north and there's
some discussion on whether or not it's
going to head east partially uh as it
gets closer to Insanata. If it does,
it'll be over the um uh Gulf of
California in the northern Sea of
Cortez. When it does that, the last time
it did that, we got a lot of rain here
in Tucson. Uh some projections uh are at
3 and 4 in this weekend. So, so Tucson
is staging sand and bags ahead of the
expected rain from Hurricane Priscilla.
Now, in my experience, if you go and
fill up your bags and do all that stuff,
then nothing happens. But if you're
like, "Oh, it's not going to be a big
deal." That's when it come comes in. Any
residents are encouraged to prepare
early and protect. So, you just bring
your own shovel. Sand and empty bags
will be available at High Corbett Field.
That's where you can go. I think it
started at 3 pm this afternoon and it
will go all through the week. Um the
hurricane's going to hit landfall
Thursday evening and we'll know whether
or not Friday or Saturday. For those of
you who are announcing some of your
events this weekend and or your kids are
in need sports outdoors, you may have
some alternative plans. So I just wanted
to let the community know about that. I
think that's pretty important. Thanks,
>> Council Member Ball.
>> Thank you, Mayor. There's so many great
events in October. Everybody plans an
event in October. I'm only going to
mention one, Cycllovia,
uh, organized by Living Streets Alliance
when a route is closed down to cars, so
other forms of transportation, bicycles
especially, and pedestrians can enjoy
all sorts of activities along the route.
Uh, this year it's the fall one is
Sunday, October 26th. Um, it's
connecting the vibrant communities in
Dunar Spring, Bario, Blue Moon, Old
Pasco, and Bronx Park from 9:00 a.m. to
3 p.m. You can see the route and all the
activities online. Thank you, Mayor.
>> Council Molly,
>> no announcements. Mayor,
>> Council Member Pettis. I just want to
reiterate as we kind of touched on
during proclamations, uh this Saturday,
October 11th, is going to be uh the day
of the girl uh as well as uh a day uh of
in my uniform uh with the many
ponderosas. Uh that's a collaboration
uh with support from Human Community
College that aims to inspire young girls
and young ladies um by offering them the
opportunity to explore careers uh
through direct interactions with
successful women. Um again, that's going
to be October 11th uh starting at 10:00
a.m. at the Desert Vista campus. You can
learn more at miniodorosas.org.
>> Thank you, council member. And I have um
an announcement and then a reminder. Uh
first announcement, please join me and
our small business program along with
the Tucson Industrial Development
Authority tomorrow as we celebrate the
grand opening of the Tucson Small
Business Center from 4 to 7:00 p.m. at
600 South Meyer. Small businesses are
the backbone of our economy. They create
generational wealth, reduce poverty, and
strengthen our community. That's why I
championed the creation of the city of
Tucson Small Business Program and why
the city of Tucson is investing nearly a
million dollars in partnering with the
Tucson Industrial Development Authority.
We know that the best investment we can
make is in our residents by giving them
the tools to launch their businesses and
the capital they need to grow.
And the reminder, I want to remind
voters that early voting for the city of
Tucson general election begins today and
early ballots are being mailed. The
November 4th general election includes
elections for city council seats in W 3,
W 5, and W 6, as well as Proposition
417, which is our planned Tucson general
plan and school district budget
overrides in TUSD and Sunnyside. More
information is available at
tucsonaz.govctions
and at recorder.puma.gov.
Please vote. All righty. We move on to
item.
>> Your honor, I have one more
announcement. I'm so sorry.
>> Council member Kia.
>> Uh, this one's a little more personal.
It goes back to uh 1965.
And uh Harrison Yokum. So Harrison Yokim
for some of you people who have been
around a while was a quite he was a Pumi
County Pum Community College instructor.
He wore big like riding boots and a one
of those big 10gon hats around
everywhere. He was quite an interesting
person in Tucson and he um put an ad in
the paper to establish the Tucson
Botanical Gardens. My grandma had gotten
her my grandmother Lillian Fischer had
gotten her law license like less than a
year earlier. So she volunteered to be
the attorney for the Tucson Botanical
Gardens and the two of them along with
some other folks founded the Tucson
Botanical Gardens. This year the Tucson
Botelican Gardens is starting it it's
celebrating its 50th year. And uh
there's going to be a series of events
from October 10th, which is this Friday,
which is already sold out all the way
through May. So you can go to tucson
botanical.org.
We have a great botanical gardens in
Tucson that celebrates our native uh
plants of the desert and native flowers
and uh I wouldn't really wouldn't want
to disappoint my grandma by not
mentioning it. So I hope you guys check
it out. Thank you so much.
>> Thank you council member. Item four,
city manager report some reoccurring
events.
>> City manager communication number 311
dated October 8th is received into and
made part of the record. This time has
been scheduled to allow the city manager
to report on current events. Mr.
Manager.
>> Thank you, mayor, and good evening,
mayor and council. Uh, a couple of
announcements for tonight. Uh, effective
on October 2nd, Tucson Water expanded
its community assistance resources for
economic stability or CARES program.
This uh for eligible customers is an
opportunity for them to receive a
discount on their water service. And uh
for more addition uh additional
information, please see the Tucson Water
website or or reach out to us at at
Tucson Water. Um so that's an expansion
of that program hoping to reach
additional folks. Uh Sun Van recently uh
got a delivery of some additional
vehicles, some of which are paratransit
vehicles that are all electric. Uh which
is a great expansion of our electric
service uh electric vehicle fleet in the
Sunban um operation. Uh and that's under
a bite administration FT federal transit
authority grant a funding pulled with
the city of Tucson Tucson Electric Power
and the regional transportation
authority. So that that puts Tucson in a
leadership position again with
electrifying our transit fleet. And then
finally, um, as the mayor mentioned, we
do have programs uh, supporting small
businesses in Tucson. And tomorrow, city
of Tucson, Groundswell Capital, and the
Tucson Industrial Development Authority
will be celebrating the grand opening of
the Tucson Small Business Center
tomorrow, October 9th, from 4:00 to 7:00
p.m. That's located at 600 South Meyer,
just south of downtown. and it's in the
former site of the historic Leho Market
if you're familiar with that location.
So, please come out and join our
celebration. Thank you, Mayor.
>> Thank you, Mr. Manager. Item five,
liquor license applications.
>> City manager communication number 309
dated October 8th, is received into and
made part of the record. Miss Clerk,
please read the liquor license agenda.
>> Your honor, on the evening's agenda, we
have five applications for new licenses.
one one application for person transfer,
seven special event applications, and
one agent change acquisition of control.
All applications are in compliance with
city requirements except for item 5B3,
PBLO VIA brewing and ward 1. That item
will be considered separately. So an
appropriate motion at this time would be
to forward items 5B1, 5B2, 5B4 through
5B6, 5C1 through 5C7, and 5D1 to the
state liquor board with a recommendation
of approval.
>> So moved, your honor,
>> there is a motion.
>> Second.
>> There's a motion and a second. Any
further discussion? Council.
>> Yes, your honor.
>> I think we've got do we we don't have
cards for the t the the Circle K at
Tankerie and Hton?
We do.
>> Can we take that off? I don't We need to
have
>> Do you want to consider that separately?
>> Yes, please.
>> Okay. So, what would be the appropriate
motion, Mr. Clerk?
>> Um to approve items 5B2,
5B4 through 5B6, 5C1 through 5C7, and
5D1.
>> I'll accept that as an amendment.
>> Second. Okay. So, um the motion as
amended.
Any further discussion?
All those in favor of the motion signify
by saying I.
>> I.
>> Any against?
Motion carries. So there are two to be
considered separately. Correct.
>> What is the first one, Miss Cler?
>> 5B1, the Circle K um store in W 2. All
righty. So Circle K store in W 2. Uh do
we have any cards?
We have a lot of cards. So I would
suggest I'm going to call a few just so
that we can hear uh to see what the
perspective of of the neighbors. What I
have been advised about is that um all
of these concerns and protests we
received after right Miss Clerk after
after the the the protest period. And so
we did not have um the concerns by
neighbors um logged in. And so what I'm
going to do is I'm going to I'm going to
ask three individuals to come up and and
um and speak because they they did want
to speak on on this item in particular.
And then um Council Member Cunningham,
you can uh proceed after that.
So our our first speaker for the circle
KN 2 is going to be Andrea Leo Leowitz.
>> Good evening mayor and council members.
I wanted to talk to you about four item.
I apologize. My name is Andrea Lucowitz.
I'm the attorney for the applicant,
Circle K Incorporated. Um, I wanted to
mention four items that I'd like to talk
to you about. One is the property
history and some clarification that I
think is needed. Two is the procedure of
the process where we are now. Three is
the community engagement and the fourth
is the substantive law. So,
Circle K has a few stores along
Tankavery. One is farther east than this
site. This site is located at the
southwest corner of Hton and Tanga
Verdie. It is a five plus acre parcel
and Circle K has purchased only the
corner approximately 1 acre. There is
still a buffer around this the property
where we intend to build.
It was annexed by the city in 1984 and
has been zoned C1 since that time. It
has always been ready for commercial
development. This is not new. Circle K
did not ask for any changes to the
zoning or any exceptions. The property
will have substantial setbacks that will
include
natural landscaping in and around the
front areas near the uh traffic signals.
There's desert landscaping as well on
the south part of the property that
abuts again the commercially zoned
property below that then goes into the
area that is part of the puma flood
control. This parcel is not in any way
in or near the uh Puma County Flood
Control District and we have been told
by the county that it is a non-issue for
them.
As you mentioned for the procedure,
Circle K originally filed a series 9
application at this site. Series 9
allows beer, wine, and spirits. when it
was brought to Circle K's attention by
council member Cunningham to uh he
suggested meeting with the tank of
Verdie Valley Association leadership the
neighborhoods and through them Circle K
agreed that a 10 a series 10 beer and
wine store license might be more
appropriate as they requested. So Circle
K withdrew the series 9 application and
filed the series 10
As you know, as you mentioned, the
deadline for filing any written protests
to the application was September 4th. Of
the 30
letters we received from the clerk's
office, all were late and at least 10
were from people who lived outside of
the area to be considered within one
mile. the department, excuse me, the law
specifically says no argument shall be
filed or accepted after the 20 days. So
even though they came in and we've all
seen it, it's hard to forget it.
for the community engagement.
Um, once council member Cunningham
suggested that we meet with the TVBA
leadership, uh, Jordan Ridberg and I had
a nice Zoom meeting uh, with the
president and secretary, Mr. Mrs. TGO.
They presented us with some uh lists of
issues that we found um well very
surprising, not the least of which was
to remove the installation of the
underground fuel storage tanks from the
plans.
Well, this is the Circle K that has
fuel, so we're going to need those fuel
storage tanks. Um, they asked about
questions about traffic, about the
native animal population, night sky
standards, uh, the signage. All of these
things had already been approved by the
state and the city. The Arizona
Department of Environmental Quality has
all the records. They have approved the
underground storage tanks. The city of
Tucson has approved every
permit or application required for this
site, including lighting designs and
signage that does comply and exceeds the
night sky. And also there is a um gosh,
excuse me, scenic corridor there that
we're in compliance with that as well.
Um, like I said, the one thing that they
asked that made perfect sense to us was
if we could take the way the nine and go
for a 10, we we would find that as a
compromise. Um, they also asked us to
prohibit food truck parking as they had
seen it on other properties, and that's
not an issue here. Circle K owns the
property. It's not going to allow any
food trucks or any vending going on in
the parking lot. where that occurred. Is
it a at a location where the landlord or
there is another property owner who
allows it right next door? Uh finally,
they suggested um if Circle K were to
install a park-like setting that would
include uh uh where hikers, bikers, and
horsemen take a break or water station.
And we absolutely agree to that and
welcome those people to come and stop
and we will provide you know a bench and
bottle filling station, bike repair,
those things. After all of this, uh, we
didn't hear anything. Uh, excuse me. The
the TRAOS did, uh, contact Circle K, but
at that point realizing that many of
these issues were truly non-starters,
asking Circle K to go back almost to the
drawing board to get new uh, re
reconsider signage, lighting,
underground storage tanks. When all
these things had already been approved,
Circle K did not respond directly to the
TROOS, but did carry on ongoing
conversations with council member
Cunningham.
Last week, we Circle K
um suggested having a community meeting.
We had sent out a notice about 10 days
in advance asking uh the community
members. In fact, we use the email
addresses of the
late and actually
you know the notices that were sent that
were late. We use those addresses and
sent notice as well as to the TVVA which
has a outreach through their website.
>> Miss Leawitz, you've gone on more than
five minutes.
>> I'm sorry. I'm sorry. But we've come to
a conclusion please.
>> Okay. Um anyway. Okay. So when we
suggested the meeting, it was to be on
Saturday. We were disappointed when we
found on their website that it says
TVA's position is that we do exactly as
the Circle K attorney stated, ask
questions. Raising specific concerns or
issues only give Circle K time to create
a smooth sounding response to use during
the MNC meeting on the 7th. By
refraining from protesting and only
asking questions, we hope to glean
information from her for use in our M
andC meeting and give Circle K little
time to respond with a canned or
prepared response. This has been very
frustrating for us at the council of
suggestion a couple of months ago for
another Circle K location. Um, we have
tried community outreach. This is the
second time it's come straight back at
us as we're not going to tell them
anything. So, it's very frustrating for
us. So, back to the we get to the law
19-1-72
from the Arizona Administrative Code
list 12 things to consider on the
location. First, petitions and temp and
testimony from individuals who favor,
oppose, or issue a civil license. We've
already talked about that. The petitions
are out. Um the number of types of
licenses within one mile. We're moving
one license for another. We're going to
close the store that's east of this. It
has a series 9 license, we'll be taking
it away, replacing it with a series 10
at this location. So there's not an
increase in the number of license and in
fact there's a 10 instead of a nine.
Evidence that all necessary licenses and
permits for which the applicant is
eligible at the time of application have
been attend
have been obtained. Every license we
need is already been approved. Building
permits are ready to be issued.
residential and commercial population of
the community and its likelihood of
increasing, decreasing, or remaining
static. I don't think there's any doubt.
We all know it's increasing.
Residential and commercial population
density within one mile of the proposed
premises. This store property doesn't
abut any residential property. It's
carved out of the commercial lot and
doesn't abut any other. We're not going
to be touching anybody's residential
property.
um evidence concerning the nature of the
proposed business potential market.
Again, Circle K identified this property
because it's zoning allowed this use of
right. We didn't ask for any changes.
Another question effect on vehicular
traffic within one mile. Again, they
went through a traffic studies and part
of the study and what they've prepared
is you will not be able to enter this
circle. Okay, there's an entrance on how
to
>> Okay, Miss Les Cors, I'm going to have
to stop you there. You've spent more
than 10 minutes and we do have other
public hearings and other liquid work
licenses to consider. So, um, you've
made your point and I'm going to give
some time to the individuals that are,
uh, opposing this. I'm just going to
have, uh, two others, uh, on the
perspective of the of the, um,
neighborhood. So, thank you so much.
We're going to move on to Joan Tjo.
>> Three
is Joan Tjo. There she is.
Ladies and gentlemen of council, I'm
Joan Trigo. Oh, I'm sorry. I've got the
wrong paperwork.
Doing too many things. I'm Joanne Trigo
and I represent the Tank of Rudy Valley
Association and our community's strong
opposition to proposed Circle K liquor
license. Circle K announced a rebranding
effort to better compete in Tucson's
market. But rebranding without
addressing deeply rooted operational
issues is, as the saying goes, trying to
turn turn a frog into a prince. For
years, Circle K stores across Tucson
have been linked to 247 operations, low
staffing, very poor maintenance. All of
which have real consequences for our
neighborhoods like attracting transient
populations, increased incidents of
criminal and disruptive behaviors, and
noticeable decline in safety and quality
of life. This proposed site is
especially sensitive. It's located in an
important repairarian corridor and it's
surrounded by residential neighborhoods
that value quiet, safety, and dark
skies. Our residents are not just
casually concerned. We are
overwhelmingly opposed. At our recent
meeting, only 7% supported this project.
That means 93%
a clear resounding majority do not want
this Circle K period. TVVA engaged
directly with Circle K asking them to go
beyond the city of Tucson's codes by
lowering their proposed 15 foot sign.
Yes, it's taller than most of the nearby
homes. by exceeding Night Skies lighting
regulations and by dimming their lights
between midnight and 6:00 a.m. We also
proposed innovative security measures
for alcohol sales like alarm triggered
price tags that they use in high theft
retail establishments. But instead of
embracing this leadership opportunity,
Circle K challenged us. They said,
"Provide us with examples from other
convenience stores that already use
systems like that rather than pioneering
this themselves." The proposed liquor
license is especially troubling. The
location is near two schools, alcohol
and substance rehabilitation centers,
and is a main route for our local school
district.
Circle K has made no concrete
commitments. Instead, they've responded
to all of our concerns with vague
references to corporate policies and
have outright rejected our request to
leave alcohol sales out of this
location. We believe this liquor license
at this location poses serious and
avoidable risks to public safety, youth
accessibility, and community well-being.
And one of the things that we're really
uh sensitive about is that Councilman
Cunningham's experience as a youth and
probation officer and teacher deepens
our concerns about access and our
students. On behalf of the Tanganger
residents, I respectfully ask you to
deny this liquor license.
>> Thank you so much.
>> Calling on uh Tom Adang.
Good evening. My name is Tom Adding. I'm
a Tucson resident and president of the
Bear Canyon Neighborhood Association.
Speaking in strong opposition to the
liquor license requested by Circle K for
their proposed 10290 East Tanker Tanker
Road store. Our association has four
concerns with this request. First,
putting in this Circle K store with gas
stations and liquor sales will attract a
clientele, mostly homeless, who will
migrate to this new location. The open
lot upon which Circle K is to be built,
will be immediately adjacent to or
across the street from two HOAs, Tankver
Woods and Tankver Trails. in its eight
August 19th denial of the Circle K uh
liquor license requested by Grant and
Kraoff location. The mayor and council
uh were concerned about im immediate
proximity to housing areas. This
proposed location poses the same set of
problems, especially theft and
vandalism. Second, putting a Circle K
with gas stations and liquor sales in
this new new location will track uh car
and motorcycle operators who already
race their vehicles along the stretch of
road from Tankivery Road, Catalina
Highway intersection eastward through
the uh intersection by this proposed
store and they do it late at night and
early in the morning mostly on weekends.
Uh we are in frequent contact with
Tucson Police Department's East Side
office regarding the current unsafe
speeding and disruptive noise problems.
Putting the Circle K uh sto there will
only exacerbate our current problems.
This location will also offer a
convenient meeting place for the
speeders to congregate which will likely
result uh in an increase in
alcohol-related injuries and/or deaths.
Third, we are concerned about the impact
of alcohol use on safe operations of
fuel pumps by inebriated drivers leading
to potential fuel spills. Location is
immediately north of the Aago Caliente
Wash. Uh and it flows as it flows under
the Hton Bridge just south of this
proposed location. Any fuel spill and
resulting fire will lead to the release
of dangerous carcinogens into the wash,
the aquifer, and our water supply.
Fourth is the lack of assurance that a
valid fuel spill containment system will
be installed to ensure no fuel leak is
leaked into the AOY wash from
underground storage tanks. We have uh
our concerns. We've expressed our
concerns to the Circle K corporate
leadership uh to Council Member
Cunningham and his staff and the Arizona
Department of Environmental Quality. We
have evidence of numerous um fuel spills
I mean excuse me lawsuits filed against
retail retailers including Circle K for
improper fuel spill management across
the country including Arizona where
alcohol use and abuse were major
contributing factors. The concerns I
discussed are not independent of each
other. In fact, they are synergistic in
a very negative way. We join uh with the
TVVA neighborhood colleagues in
recommending uh the mayor and council
evaluate the risk and disapprove the
circle K request for liquor license.
Thank you for your time.
>> Thank you council member.
>> Really quick we had a bunch of people
put in cards who's all here from TVA or
BCNA
uh to protest the liquor license. So we
have a good license we have a good
number and any everybody who's here to
protest it. Please stand. Help me out.
>> Did you say stand?
>> Yeah. Yeah. So we know that you're here.
So my colleagues know you all came out.
All these folks drop the drive across
town's like an hour. So I just want the
count my council colleagues to be
sensitive to that. Thank you everybody.
>> Uh that that that's up to the mayor. Uh
mayor, would you consider one more
speaker? No, I think there's there's
plenty. I mean, you know, Council Member
Cunningham who's here in opposition.
Um, I think we have another one and we
have several public hearings. So, I I
think you know what to do.
>> All right. So, a couple things. We I
have a major there's a major development
that's come up. Um, Crayoft and Grant
Circle K is
being argued at the state the state
in on November 6th and I've been called
to testify in that. It's actually the
first time I've ever been called to
testify in a liquor license. So, I've
got some uh significant
uh concerns about
talking about this liquor license and
talking about that other one. I'm on
record as opposing the Circle K. I've
been on record about 15 times. I've said
that we're going to take a look at the
underground storage tanks. We're going
to look at the drainage concerns. We're
going to look at the zoning. The big one
is we went through the neighborhood
plan. I mean, we we looked at every
we've looked at every rock. There's one
piece that I think that's out there that
we probably need to have them do over
and I can get on the record tonight and
that is that when they did their traffic
study, they didn't take into account
what will happen on the RTA uh Hton
project and they didn't take into
account whether or not uh the homes
there's two different developments along
Hton going south to 22nd that could be
built. And so I think that traffic study
needs to happen. uh but I I can't
we have our procedures and laws so I
have to make sure that uh we're meeting
those. On the other side, let's talk
about the liquor license really quick.
One thing is is that I was under the
impression that if they filed for a
series 10, they'd also do a covenant for
20 years to not refile for a series 9,
which is I think a good that's a a good
thing. And whether I want the Circle K
there or not long term,
I do not want to
if it if if it's going to be there, I
want it to be the series 10, obviously,
especially if it's going to be there for
20 years. But that then puts me in the
position of acknowledging that the
Circle K is going to happen when I'm
trying to help the neighbors stop it.
So, I think there's two options here. We
can either a recommend
uh with the caveat that the 20 years is,
but I don't really want to do that. I'd
rather just do no recommendation because
I don't want to acknowledge that the
Circle K is going to get built.
>> Um and if I may,
>> what I'm hoping what I'm hoping is is
that Circle K keeps their word at the
state and still files for the series 9
uh the series 10 with the 20-year
compact. More importantly, if that isn't
the case, then I want to recommend
denial. So, that's kind of what
>> So, what would be the recommendation of
the city attorney?
>> Thank you, Ar members of Council, member
Cunningham. I think that it's an
appropriate uh it's appropriate to
either provide a recommendation of
denial if the uh condition is not met or
no recommend or approval if it is met um
rather than either or you can just
recommend have a no recommendation. I
don't know that you can do both.
So I'm going to recommend denial
and if the condition is not met then is
it our discretion if I recommend denial
and and if the condition is met but does
it go to no recommendation or does it
become approval? That's I guess is my
question.
>> Sure. So I I think what you're looking
to do is you're recommending denial
unless they agree to the 20-year
condition. Otherwise it would be
approval.
But then I'm still then I'm recommending
approval for a store that I don't want
and I don't want to do that. I want to
go from denial to no recommendation.
>> I think we can write I think we can
write it that way. Uh I think there's
just going to be a little bit of
confusion at the state level, but we can
actually ab absolutely make that
recommendation if that's what you want
to do.
>> I think that's an appropriate motion.
Okay.
>> Second.
>> There is a motion and a second. And just
for clarity, can we can we repeat the
motion?
>> I move recommended uh we recommend the
application for denial unless the
20-year covenant is agreed to with the
neighbors and then it would move to no
recommendation.
>> All right. So, there is a motion and a
second. Any further discussion on this
hearing? None. All those in favor
signify by saying I.
>> I.
>> I. I
>> I
>> any against motion carries. Thank you so
much for everyone that came to this
item. We're moving to PBLO Vida uh
brewing in ward one that is not in
compliance with uh planning and
development services department. Vice
Mayor Santa Cruz.
>> Hi Mayor. Um so what is uh I guess next
steps for this? Do we do they need to
start all over or can we give them some
time to catch up?
I I'm asking the clerk what the options
are because it's much more of a um
logistical
issue. I think that they sent an email
to PDSD and PDSD
still says they can't do their their
their application within time. Is that
right, Delma?
>> Yeah. So, it's either going to have to
be a denial or they have to withdraw and
reapply when they're ready.
So, Vice Mayor, there it's either a
denial or they have to withdraw their
application and reapply.
>> I would say withdraw.
>> Withdraw. So, um are you recommending
that we not approve this tonight and
recommend to the applicant that they
withdraw and reapply?
>> All righty.
>> That is correct.
>> So, that would be made in the form of a
motion.
Correct.
>> Second. There's a motion and a second.
Any further discussion on this motion.
All righty. I'm not seeing any any hands
up. Uh all those in favor of the motion,
please signify by saying I
>> I
>> I.
>> Any against? Motion carries.
Ready? So, we're done with item five.
Correct. We're done with item five. We
are moving to item six.
Call to the audience. All
>> righty,
Miss Clerk. Uh, you're requested to read
the heading. At this time, the public is
allowed to address the mayor and council
on any issue except for items scheduled
for a public hearing. Call to the
audience will last for 30 minutes, and
speakers are limited to three minute
presentations. The green light will turn
on when you're um called to speak. It
will turn yellow when you have 30
seconds remaining. and then it'll turn
red and beep when your time is up. At
that time, please conclude your
comments.
>> All righty. We're going to start with uh
start with Maria Copperstein.
>> Hello.
>> And please use the tolerant mic. Just um
put it close to your mouth. Yeah, there
you go. Thank you.
>> Awesome. Hello. Good evening. My name is
Maria Cooperstein. Uh, and I'm a student
at the UOVA and I'm here today to urge
you to vote in favor of a formalized
opposition against a compact that was
present that was presented to the
Arizona Board of Regents on October 1st
by President Trump.
Allow me to talk a little bit more about
myself. I'm uh I am in many clubs on
campus. I'm deeply involved on campus.
Uh uh all my passion is on campus. I'm
in um I'm a first generation student and
uh I'm in an activist group called
Students for Socialism. I'm in a salsa
dancing club and um I not just here to
tell you about myself and tell you about
these organizations I'm in. I'm here to
tell you that this compact will directly
impact all of these um incredible
organizations that are on campus and all
of these communities that are on campus.
And so, um, I'm here to tell you that
these will directly impact these
communities, right? Um,
so I want to bring attention to some of
the verbiage that is within this
compact. Specifically, the verbiage
referring to the transforming or
abolishing of institutional
of institutional units that purposely
punish, belittle, and even spark
violence against conservative ideas.
This specific verbiage is very vague and
is very conveniently vague because there
is no limit or restrictions on what this
verbiage could there's no limit or
restrictions um there is no limit to the
restrictions excuse me um on our speech
or on our communities or on our
resources.
So therefore that means that this
compact can impact students of color,
LGBTQ plus students and international
students and does directly attack LGBTQ
plus students uh students of color DEI
initiatives and international students.
So
I want to uh be clear that the UOVA
students will not stand by and be
complicit as our freedom of speech um is
sold away. We will not stand we will not
be bystandards um well our educational
freedom is sold. Our resources our
resources our freedom of speech our
student safety is not for sale. and we
ask you to vote in favor of a formalized
opposition to Trump's compact. To accept
the contract is to reject is to reject
marginalized students. Please put
pressure on Garamela to say no and to
show that and show that the Tucson
community stands with the students.
Thank you.
>> Thank you.
[Applause]
>> Adrien Adrien Ael I believe it is Ael.
Adren able.
>> Okay. Um hello council members. Um Mayor
Romero, thank you for your time. My name
is Adrien Ael. Um I'm also a UA student
and I'm representing the coalition to
protect students and workers on the UA
campus. Um I'd like to talk to you about
the resolution number 2418
[Music]
um relating to higher education and
human rights. Um this is that compact
that was just spoken about. I don't
think anyone who is informed on Sesh
Garamela's track record um is under any
illusion as to whether this compact's
promised money, which isn't even
explicitly stated in the compact, would
actually going be going to students or
to higher admins pockets. Um Garamela
makes more than $800,000 a year while he
strips away our student cultural centers
plus services for students dealing with
domestic violence, which according to
him are bottomless holes that the
university pours money into and is
becoming impoverished for it. Obviously,
this is untrue. Anyone who has been to
the centers knows this is not the case.
The job security for cultural center
employees is abysmal. The administration
threatens constant closure and
downsizing. What are you downsizing?
We've been effectively told that certain
students don't deserve the chance to
donate clothing to each other, to plan
and attend events to each other, bring
food for each other, to stock the
pantries, um celebrate each other's
graduations, and more. The fact that
this is what's being attacked is
telling. When one person can't stand to
see others happy and thriving in their
community getting the recognition they
deserve and he feels the need to try to
legislate them away, it's a mark of
deep, deep insecurity.
The way that the current US
administration is dangling funding over
universities heads is bribery. It isn't
right and it isn't normal. Add the fact
that this is a vague boilerplate compact
that threatens university departments
that belittle conservative views. What
does that even mean practically? And
also, there is no explicitly stated
financial benefit deciding um two
signing. Again, this isn't normal. I
want us to really recognize that when
else has this happened in history. Um
that a leader tries to determine what
exactly is taught in schools
specifically to show and reinforce and
consolidate power. Some examples that
come to mind are Nazi Germany where
curriculum was changed to include quote
unquote race science where Arian
supremacy was taught. Fascist Italy
where teacher where teachers had to make
an oath of loyalty to Mussolini which
honestly sounds similar to the signing
of this compact. If you think these are
extreme examples, you're right. They
are. But these attacks on what
universities can teach and who can be
here and who gets resources are extreme.
This is no small matter. I'm imploring
you to reject Donald Trump's controlling
compact and pressure President Garamela
specifically to reject it since the UA
faculty senate already did in a vote 60
in a vote 40-6. Um but notoriously he
doesn't listen to them or his students.
We need to set a precedent that stands
on the right side of history. Standing
with our neighbors, with our community,
with our students, not against them for
unchangeable characteristics like race,
race, ethnicity, queerness, ability, or
background, knowledge, truth, the
community, and bonds between students
and faculty, the act of being educated
itself for any one person should not be
a partisan issue. It's awful and frankly
ridiculous that we're at the point as a
country where our president thinks it
is. I think Tucson can do better.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Dable.
Paris Mado. Paris Marcado.
Sorry. Give me one second to pull this
up.
Okay.
Good afternoon, council members. My name
is Paris Benigas Marcado. I'm the
daughter of Enrique Marcado, also known
as Kicks. Um, my dad was tragically
murdered on Tuesday night, September
23rd, 2025, while riding with the
cyclist group Tuesday night bike rides.
Um, while on the loop, the trail called
the loop, he was stabbed in the chest.
The substick was presumed to be homeless
and under the influence of drugs. These
are two serious issues that have only
worsened over time. Homelessness and
drug use. And as a community, we all see
it and we cannot ignore it any longer.
But the problem at hand goes deeper than
policing or enforcement. These are about
choices. Every day, choices are made by
individuals, by family, and by the city.
Choices that shape what kind of
community Tucson will become. And
tonight, while I have your attention, I
want to focus what my dad truly was
passionate about, the community. Growing
up under privilege, my dad f my dad
found peace and joy in biking.
One year, he even asked Santa for tubes
for his bike. Not the new bike, just the
tubes, cuz that's just the kind of
person he was.
As an adult, biking gave him purpose. He
found solace in it. It kept him away
from wrong influence and surrounded him
with people who shared something healthy
and positive. That's what good choices
can do. They can change lives. They can
save lives. Without guidance, it's easy
to take the wrong path, to lose hope, or
to lose direction. That's why I'm asking
the council, please invest in bike
programs for lowincome and
underprivileged youth. Create spaces
where kids can learn, ride safely, and
feel they belong. Give them a chance to
make the right choices to find purpose,
community, and selfworth before the
streets find them. My dad believed in
bringing people together, different
ages, different backgrounds, and making
everyone feel like family on those
rights. That's a spirit we need to carry
forward. Alongside efforts to clean and
secure our trails, let's also commit to
building community and empowering the
next generation choose healthier and
brighter paths. Let's focus on the
future and invest in the people who
build it. And um if anyone else speaks,
I would just like to um ask them to be
respectful and not speak on behalf of my
dad and keep their their political
belief separate from their condolences.
But thank you so much for your time.
[Applause]
Thank you, Miss Marcalo. You have my
commitment to do that, to continue to do
that.
Um, Jesus Mario Valenuela, I believe it
is.
>> Good afternoon, mayor and council. My
name is Jesus Valenuela. I'm here as a
writer and
>> Can you please use the
>> I'm here as a writer and a driver for
Sunran. That's okay.
>> I ride the buses occasionally um for uh
numerous reasons as a driver while I
drive for Suntran. Uh, one of the things
that I've experienced with Sunshrine and
with the security on the downtown and
all the transit centers is that security
is not actually doing their job.
Numerous times I've had to remind them
of things that are occurring. For
example, last night while I was driving
the Route 34, Block 5, I noticed that
there were some uh young men passing
around pills. They had a jar while the
uh security guard was actually standing
at the opposite corner knowing that all
these illicit uh drugs are being dealt
in the in what would be the uh northeast
corner. Okay. So, and another thing is
that they're not enforcing the laws and
and rules that are set in place. the
bicycling, the uh skateboarding, the
loitering, a lot of children making it
at a playground on on uh uh weekends on
evenings, especially on the on the
weekends. Uh when these are children
that are of underage, uh why are they uh
being permitted to do this is beyond me.
One uh one of the the things that
occurred to me while I was on route
number 20 21 on Sunday at approximately
554 I radio dispatch uh letting them
know that there were two young ladies
and I noticed that they had a bottles uh
so therefore it triggered my thoughts
thinking this is a um a bottle of
alcohol. I pulled the bus over at a
distance. I I I mentioned to the young
lady, "Listen, that is a bottle of
alcohol." And and how old are you? I
asked her. She says, she said, "18."
There were two 18-year-old uh uh young
ladies, right? So I she said, "We're
just going to the next stop." I said,
"All right." Okay. So I proceeded,
right? And then uh I called dispatch and
I notified them of what was occurring
with with these two young ladies.
Dispatch uh said to me, "Uh we didn't
sell them the alcohol. We didn't give
them the alcohol. Let them ride. Then
the young then the young ladies said to
me, "Is it possible that we could just
you could just take us downtown." A few
minutes later, a dispatch uh called back
and he said, "Uh, listen." He says, "Uh,
I thought about it. What you might want
to do is uh try and get them downtown,
convince them to go downtown." They had
already mentioned to me that they were
going downtown, so I knew they were
going there as and he says, "I notified
uh security that they should uh be there
awaiting for you to uh determine whether
they're going to involve TPD or not."
Okay. So, when I when I drove up, uh
security was no nowhere around. So, I
want to know is who dropped the ball,
dispatch or security? Now, okay. So, why
did I think about that? Why? Because you
have two young ladies and uh think about
this. It's some one of your loved ones,
right? And I let them go and I drop the
ball and they get either raped, get into
an accident, get killed. So who's
dropping the ball? Why isn't this being
addressed? This is a serious issue.
We're talking about two young ladies
that are 18 years old.
>> Thank you for your time.
>> Thank you, Mr. Rollins.
[Applause]
Noah James Markham.
Aloha mayor and to the rest of the city
council.
I'm from the great city of Tempi. I
would like to talk about police officers
here in your city in Tucson that we do
need to do a better job with people with
disabilities. It's having a disability
my whole life. I shouldn't be afraid of
police officers at all, but they need
more education for the city with police
officers. Educational purposes like
Donald Trump said that stop taking
Taleno because it causes autism is not
educating police officers. Also, I would
like to ask that when you have events in
Tucson, example concerts that you always
have a sign language interpreter up
there. I don't care how much the city
has to pay for it. Please always do it
no matter if someone asks or not. Did
you know that people lie about their
disabilities or just want the money?
Might give you a clue.
Someone in this community to vote out
President
Biden out of the presidency.
How could you do that? I hope that we
can hire more women police officers,
too. And if they are on maternity leave,
they should have 8 to 12 weeks off. And
if they have an abortion or miscarriage,
they should have the same paid time off
or more if they need more time off. The
University of Arizona should not be
bending their knees to President Donald
Trump just because he threatened to not
give you funds to the school. That
doesn't you don't need to listen to what
he says. DEI matters in schools and
universities. It's important to state
and to the world. I would also ask that
we continue to build build because
people love Arizona and it was pretty
boring driving from Tempe, Arizona up to
here. Mahalo and thank you for letting
me share tonight.
>> Thank you.
Jem Abara.
Hello, Tucson City Council. My name is
Jem and I'm here to speak on voting yes
on the resolution to oppose Garla
accepting the compact.
Um, I'm an alum an alumni of the UVA as
of May this year. And upon my graduation
and completing my educational journey
thus far, I moved back with my family to
Phoenix. This community over the span of
five years though and referring to
Tucson has impacted me so deeply that I
deem it a matter of urgency to complete
the two-hour drive to return whenever an
important decision is about to be made
that would have devastating ripple
effects. Not just in the immediate but
for generations. Ripple effects for
current community well-being. community
members in first grade who are swearing
to their teachers that they will go to
college and ripple effects for economic
well-being since that is the major
concern at hand that tends to be the
greatest concern for people such as
Trump and Garamela. One man each of
their own respective institutions who
determine the quality and the quantity
of hardship for thousands.
I stand before you able to say that I
have earned my degree because of DEI
initiatives that which the compact
opposes. I come from a lowincome
neighborhood. DEI is not just about
queer and trans issues. DEI provides
opportunity for those who would not
ordinarily have the time, money,
experience, knowledge, and in other
words, privilege of obtaining the
opportunity in the first place.
It's proven that investing investing in
your community through monetary
investments and equity initiatives is
what makes it strong.
Just look at Mexico.
The people of Tucson cannot and will not
thrive is Trump if Trump is not firmly
resisted in his advancements of absolute
institutional authority or in other
words fascism.
and in and an an additional shield
shield of opposition is not put on
Garamela as well.
Garamela cannot accept the terms for
exclusive funding. I stand before you as
a proud first generation queer
Mexican-American who despite the powers
that be feels actualized as a person
because of the education, the growth and
the connections going to university and
my studies gave me.
The only opposition a child should face
when deciding whether they'll go to
college is none.
When I needed a job, it was people like
Dr. Brian Carter who value DEI that saw
my potential and wanted to give a person
of color an opportunity to develop
technology, as in hands-on skills in
creating the technology you use and even
ones that you still don't know about.
work experience that people like me have
systematically or deliberately been
barred from. And when I needed a change
in career emphasis, it was people like
Dominique, Lucero, and Indira who their
livelihoods are built off of DEI that
saw my earnestness for community and
created an entire position just for me.
And so, Tucson needs you to vote yes on
the resolution to oppose Garamela
accepting the compact. Thank you.
[Applause]
Patricia Belli.
Patricia Belli,
>> please use the higher mic.
>> Okay, thank you. I wasn't sure. I didn't
know. Um
My name is Patricia Bowley and um I very
much fear that the results of the most
recent potentially illdesigned Sunran
survey may be used as a further excuse
for the federal government to employ the
military in Tucson which may affect
everyone residing, working, traveling
through andor visiting Tucson. The
military tend to be trained for war and
there is never a just war and violence
begets both a lot of suffering and more
violence. More valid surveys in my
opinion tend to use a liyker scale such
as a fivepoint liyker scale rather than
a binary yes no force choice. In
addition, the word safety can refer to
so many different aspects of public
transportation, such as concerns about
sudden stops or sudden slowing due to
traffic or when buses are crowded and
people have to sit so close together or
when there are people who have to stand,
whether the passenger taking the survey
stands or sits near others standing um
or disembarking and um disembarking with
safety issues. And then there of course
are many potential different people
issues including a myriad of people
issues that don't directly relate to the
public transportation whatsoever. There
are also potential safety issues as tra
at transit stops that may include
weather issues and whether there are
sufficient accommodations for someone
with one or more physical disabilities
such as myself who experiences
difficulty walking and standing and
especially for persons who seem to
experience much more physical
difficulties than myself. Taking public
transportation still seems safer than
traveling in a private vehicle. Um,
please don't rely on police because
police tend to criminalize behaviors
that don't need to be criminalized and
criminalization tends to increase the
risk of violence and economic and mental
health problems. Also, please don't rely
on mental health workers who tend to
involuntarily hospitalize people because
psychiatry tends to do more harm in so
many ways than good. As documented in
part separately by each of Robert
Whitaker, author of book of anatomy of
an epidemic and founder of Madden
America website um Rob with
>> what was that?
>> I'm sorry it was inter. Go ahead. Sorry,
Rob Whipon, author of the book Your
Consent Is Not Required and Jim
Godstein's online report Improving
Mental Health Outcomes. Involuntary
hospitalization tends to increase the
risk of violence, suicides, and more
mental health problems as documented by
an article on Med America website in
2025 summarized by Peter Simon. For some
sources, please refer to my letter that
I sent to the city council and mayor and
city manager dated September 27th, 2025.
Please enlist people trained in conflict
management instead. Thank you for your
attention to these important matters.
>> Thank you so much, ma'am.
Pat Collier. Pat Collier.
Desiree knew it. Um, when
>> Desiree
Hello, my name is Desiree Win. Before I
continue, I want to formalize my thanks
to Councilman Perez and Vice Mayor Santa
Cruz for acting with such swiftness and
speediness in pushing for this
resolution to formalize our opposition,
especially for the city of Tucson
against Trump's compact. This should be
an act that many cities across the
nation are looking up to. So I urge us
to act with swiftness with this res
resolution.
My name is Desiree. I am an
undergraduate research assistant in
different three different labs. I am the
lead undergraduate research ambassador
at the University of Arizona and a
student organizer with students for
socialism. In my freshman year, I would
have never imagined someone like me
having the opportunity to perform
groundbreaking research that could
impact someone's life. And now in my
final year at the University of Arizona,
ready to transition into my masters of
science, I would have never imagined my
future would be under attack once again
with this compact. Fears of losing
funding for graduate school, grants for
research projects, or even research
opportunities for for beginning students
are not just hypotheticals. They are
real looming threats upon our
aspirations and careers shared by all of
us students. No matter what stage you
are in your training, these threats are
made even closer to us in with this
recent compact. My involvement in
research and passion to pursue research
as my life goal is not is absolutely a
product of DEI policies. the generations
of students who came before me to push
for programs that increase research
opportunities for communities that have
been historically marginalized by this
university and by the history of
science. This past year, the UA
administration has capitulated to the
Trump's agenda to dismantle DEI policies
that provide essential resources for our
students. Whether it's a feminist uh
pharmacy providing contraceptives to
hundreds of students to free tutoring
sessions that guarantee student success.
Now we are faced with another attempt to
destroy the sectors of the university
that makes the University of Arizona
thrive and be a top leader in research
innovation and in the arts. Yet this
time is different. This time we urge for
the support of the city of Tucson to
vote yes on this resolution to oppose
the Trump's compact. This compact will
undeniably open doors for continue
attacks from our federal government on
admissions, research, and curriculum at
the University of Arizona that we cannot
allow for to happen. We are in a unique
position here. The rest of the nation is
looking at us, not just the students,
but at the city of Tucson of how we will
unite and fight back against this
government overreach that this
administration cannot just cut the funds
that we've been entitled to and try to
give it back with a secret agenda
attached to it. We know this isn't
right. We know the only moral course of
action is the demand for Garin Mela to
reject his compact in order to protect
the civil liberties and academic freedom
for all students. And if Garin Melo
won't listen to his students, his own
workers, his own faculty, then he will
have to listen to the city of Tiosan
when they approve this resolution.
>> Thank you, Miss W.
JP Salvatier.
JP Salvadier.
Madame Mayor, um JP Salvatara, Tucson
resident, native, speaking for myself.
Um there's a famous quote I'd like to
make. Our XYZ genen children were not
bred
to pay rent for their entire lives.
When the mayor and council engages
itself in a manner that disaffects
public acclamation and fulltimely
disclosure on major economic, health,
safety, and environmental proposals
with predetermined direction from
executive session, the outcome of this
subject matter without full timely
public disclosure constitutes
malfeasants and loss of public trust.
non-disclosure practices of any kind
between city of Tucson, Pumac County,
and other proxy agents like Southern
Arizona Chamber of Commerce will rarely
guarantee taxpayer security.
Contracts will always encourage
abandoning the public servants fiduciary
responsibility.
What does it mean to formally intervene
in TEP's ACC rate case? No more cake
sniffing.
Ignore the 40,000 taxpayers that
petitioned you to disqualify TE mega
murder polls on Campbell Avenue.
What does it mean to Tucson residents
for public responsible government trigg
proposed changes to neighborhood plans
by the planning commission's
community corridor tools to circumvent
neighborhood descent and inquiry by
fasttracking developer multistructure
buildings exemptions current zoning
roads and on-site parking guidelines for
middle housing gentrification.
Further plan Tucson infrastructure and
public services that unlawful exclude
state required mandates to address
neighborhood preservation and
revitalization covenants. Therefore,
vote no on all city county
non-disclosure practices.
No. Foris TEP Foreign Proxy Agency
Energy Contracting Services. No on 414.
Reject Community Corridor Tools.
Prop 417. No. Divorce us from TEP's
usery rates and parasitic enslavement
and renew your faith in our our ability
to follow your guidance. Thank you very
much,
>> Joshua Dates.
or deeds. Joshua Deetsz.
>> Hi. Hello. My name is Joshua Deetsz. I'm
a recent graduate at the U of A and I'm
here to speak on the recent uh
government uh Trump administration
trying to bully the UVA into reflecting
its own values. I know that it's very
easy to dismiss the concerns of
students. So, I'll speak for the
concerns of men like my father, who is a
lifelong Republican who served over 20
years in the United States Air Force and
is disgusted with Trump's attacks on
freedom of speech and our higher
education.
My father is a Republican who models
himself on our late Arizona senators
such as John McCain and Barry Goldwater
who stood by their values instead of
following the Republican script. And I
believe that is Arizonan values and
American values. And what the Trump
administration is trying to do here, the
University of Arizona, is not reflect
that of Arizonan values or American
values, but Trump values, values that we
have no reason to submit to. And I
believe that there is a need for a long
speech to explain why you should vote
for this resolution. It's quite simple.
Thank you.
>> Thank you. And this is our last speaker,
Jessica Allen.
>> Hello. Good evening, council and mayor.
Again, good to see you all again. Uh my
name is Jessica Allen and I'm here uh as
a concerned citizen. Um, first I want to
start off by saying I feel that the
mayor and the council should be ashamed
of themselves. Um, I think you have all
been aware of the homeless, criminal,
and drug problem in the city and how out
of control it is. Um, bus drivers are
being attacked, regular citizens are
being murdered. Where does it end?
Serious crimes are rising and it does
not seem to be getting the attention it
needs. It's now time for you, mayor, and
this council to take some accountability
for not protecting the citizens of the
city of Tucson. When will you stop being
ignorant to the rising crimes and hold
these criminals accountable for their
actions? There are plenty of resources
available for anybody that truly wants
to get help and get off the street. But
the citizens of the city of Tucson are
completely on our own. Instead of
spending thousands of dollars on
enabling the homeless criminals and drug
addicts, spend that money on more police
to enforce the laws that exist but are
not even being enforced. There is a
YouTube video titled Inside the Drug
Capital of the Southwest. It's about
Tucson. I highly recommend you take a
look at that video. The homeless and the
drugs and the criminals don't just exist
in one area. They're everywhere and they
are growing by the day.
You have ignored the citizens of Tucson
for way too long, just like you ignored
the high opposition to Star Village for
your own agenda. In the Tucson Sentinel
March 10th, 2023, when you were up for
reelection, it stated that you, Mayor
Romero, promised to invest more into the
police to reduce crime. Now, I ask, when
is that going to happen? All I have seen
is very high rise in serious crimes and
the use of drugs openly and no
repercussions for any of that.
Police are getting overwhelmed and not
getting any raises. And despite all the
extra responsibilities they're taking on
with your projects to enable the
homeless criminals and drug addicts,
they can't get a break. The cops don't
have the time to take care of everything
that you want them to do. and you're not
hiring enough, you're not giving them
more money. You should u just to be
clear, I don't want an email or a phone
call like I got last time. I want to see
change. Always remember that your
actions are going to speak way louder
than any words you could ever say. Thank
you. All righty. That was our last
speaker.
We move on to item seven,
consent agenda items.
>> Reports from the city manager on the
consent agenda are received into and
made part of the record. Miss clerk, you
are requested to to read the consent
agenda. Item A is public highway atgrade
crossing a part agreement with Union
Pacific Rail Railroad at Bilby Road.
Item B is a final plat for TD DIIB
02250026
Corona edition lots 1 through 4. Item C
is renewal of intergovernmental
agreement backup ambulance
transportation agreements between Tucson
Fire Department TFD and Golder Ranch
Fire District.
All righty. May I have a motion to uh
approve the consent agenda?
>> So moved.
>> There's a motion and a second. Any
further discussion?
Hearing none, let's go to roll call. Mr.
Dah
>> I.
>> Mrs. Lee,
>> Mr. Pettis,
>> I.
>> Mulik,
>> Mr. Cunningham,
>> I.
>> Vice Mayor Santa Cruz,
>> Mayor Romero,
>> I. The items on the consent agenda are
approved by a vote of 70. Item eight,
purchase sale and settlement agreement
with Debo Plaza Investors LLC relating
to city-owned property located at 45
North 5th Avenue.
Righty, city manager communication
number 319 dated October 8th is received
into and made prior of the record. This
is a request for mayor and council
authorization for the purchase uh sale
sale sale and settlement agreement
between the city of Tucson and the depot
plaza investors LLC for city-owned
property located at 43 North Avenue
above the depot plaza garage. Miss
Clerk, you are requested to read
resolution 24015 by number and title
only. Resolution number 24015
relating to real property authorize and
approve the purchase, sale, and
settlement agreement between the city of
Tucson City and Depot Plaza Investors
LLC DPI for city-owned property located
at 45 North 5th Avenue and declaring an
emergency.
All righty. Um I believe that council
member Oolle has her hand up. This is in
W six. So, if we go with uh Council
Member Ulik and then I'm going to
request that uh the city manager's
office or city attorney present
background information on this item. I
would really appreciate it. Go ahead,
Council Member Ulik.
>> Thank you, Mayor. And I know that uh uh
many of us have received uh considerable
input on um uh the broad topic of uh our
um GPU agreements and economic
development incentives and also
prioritizing
uh uh partnerships that that um really
uplift local small businesses. I think
you know constructive input uh writ
large about making sure that our
economic development program truly
serves in the interests of uh you know
the the community and the city at large.
And uh I think the opening of the small
business center is uh evidence as uh our
many other actions of our own uh
commitment to that. Now having said
that, I've been at this table since
2006, which I think is when this
particular development uh began with uh
Ria Noeo and City uh and uh the partners
including Scott Stitler and Depot Plaza
Investors. I I'm going to move that we
pass and adopt resolution 24015
and authorize and approve the purchase
sale and settlement agreement between
the city of Tucson and Depot Plaza
Investors.
>> Second.
>> There is a motion and a second. And this
is an opportunity for further
discussion, but I will um have the city
manager uh go over the background
because this this particular settlement
agreement goes back till 2005
and um
I think that was when council member
first got elected
uh two or three. I didn't get elected
till November of 2007. And this
particular situation and issue um
happened around 2005 2006.
And so we are still this is more than a
20-year
uh issue that we are settling in terms
of um
uh settling the the lawsuit uh that was
brought to the city of Tucson. So, I'll
just hand it over to the city manager
and you can help us um really recount a
timeline for this issue.
>> Thank you, mayor. Uh honorable mayor,
members of the council, that that's
correct. This is an issue inherited by
us all and it's actually quite a
milestone to get to the point where we
have a potential resolution here for
your consideration. Uh we would like to
give the background in kind of two main
parts. one uh city attorney Roy Lusk
will go over the timeline and uh
essentially some of the matters that are
uh to be resolved through this
settlement agreement should you approve
it. And then joining us online is Mike
Chicowski from our econ economic
initiatives office who will give a brief
overview of of GPL um incentive programs
which this item tonight is not a GPLET.
However, a lot of the input that you've
been receiving from folks relates to
G-Plets. So, we thought it was prudent
to address what a G-Pled is and is not.
Even though it's not a part of this
item, we thought it would merited uh
consideration for tonight so that um you
have the full spectrum of information
with which to decide. So, with that,
I'll turn it over to Roy Lusk for the
timeline and overview.
>> Thank you, Mr. Manager, honorable mayor,
members of council, uh member. Um I I
think it's important to think back that
it actually predates everyone because it
the the original um development
agreement related to this property goes
dates back to 2003.
Um so uh ultimately in 2005 um the
current or actually the predecessor to
the current um develop developer that
we're dealing with in this agreement uh
acquired the rights to uh the property
or or an option to purchase the
property. Uh and just for everybody's
edification, the property is really is
the uh the vacant lot uh next to the MLK
apartments near the Rialto and and and
Congress. Um that area was originally uh
a part of a development agreement that
included the MLK apartments and one
North Fifth. Um that development
agreement called for development of
those those two properties in addition
to the option to purchase the property
under consideration today.
Um through 2005 2008 uh the development
around that property. So the one north
fifth property and the renovation of MLK
was was completed in 2008 uh including
additional retail property on Congress
which which sort of kicked off the
renaissance for for the Congress area.
Um the uh during that time there was
some disagreement about how that the
option would be exercised and how it
could be exercised. Um, and that's
related to some some issues that uh
occurred during the building of the
depot plaza garage which is under the
property at 45 North Fifth or the
property that we're under discussion.
Um, during that during that uh period of
time from 2008 to 2010, we attempted to
remedy that solution. We weren't able to
until finally we entered into another
settlement agreement prior to this. That
settlement settlement agreement called
for additional development of that
property. including the uh city
providing a property uh large enough to
accommodate a building uh of about
14,000 square ft uh and about 6 to8
stories. Um unfortunately we weren't
able to do that at or provide that
property at that time and and throughout
the uh the intervening years because
there uh were some setback requirements
because there is a uh a federal builk is
a federal undertaking and it required a
an appropriate setback from the the
building next door which is the property
under consideration.
uh that then led to uh discussions over
the next 10 plus years of trying to
remedy that situation. Um fortunately my
predecessor uh Mr. Rankin was able to
negotiate just recently uh for with the
Stitler uh or or developer in this case
um to uh uh redevelop that property
because that federal undertaking had
finished and therefore was able to um uh
bring provide the building as originally
encompassed. Um, that brings us sort of
today, but I I I think it's important to
also talk about the the particular
claims uh that were a part of that that
lawsuit. Now, and I I'll remind members
of council and the mayor um that this is
a settlement agreement first and
foremost. So the types of uh the the
agreement or the remuneration that's
included in the agreement is is
basically to settle the the claims and
release us from further liability.
Uh that includes claims of uh
detrimental reliance uh because we
weren't able to because the uh the
Sitler company or or um excuse me, Depot
Plaza investors uh were not able to
build as they as the development
agreement allowed them to. Um, and even
though they weren't able to build that,
they did perform on that agreement,
which by building the 1 North Fifth
building by providing 9,000 ft of retail
on Congress. Uh, they spent about $1.42
million on initial design for the
original property that was to be built
on the depot garage site. In addition,
they redesigned it uh in the intervening
years and spent about $900,000 to do
that. Um they additionally renovated
both the MLK building uh renovated the
200 Congress block which includes the
hub and and those businesses uh the
Rialto and the Corporate building all as
part of this this development agreement.
Um so their performance uh was was
pretty significant. The the difficulty
for for them also includes the fact that
they were provided a smaller site than
originally planned for. So the 14,000 ft
was winnowed down to about 11,900 feet
or square feet, excuse me, which because
of the setbacks and uh some issues with
the bu the original building of the
depot garage uh created a situation
where they could not build the full full
uh lot. Um so that size reduction would
obviously reduce the a lot a lotment or
ability to build the the building that
they were initially trying to develop.
In addition, there's some consider
there's some concern or uh a claim of
breach of agreement in that there was an
original amount uh of over $2 million of
streetscape provided by both Rio and the
city of Tucson that was to be built as
part of this development. Uh in also
there's a parking agreement that we
weren't able to fulfill because of uh
the the inability to build the building.
So that brings us up to today. So so
there's been a significant outlay over a
period of years uh by the developer and
DPI um in order to to make way or make
ready for this particular development.
Uh we weren't able to perform on our
side until just recently and because of
uh again the efforts of my predecessor
uh we were able to come to an agreement
and that's what's presented to you
today.
>> Yeah. Uh, with that I'll I'll I'll send
it over to Mr. Chicowski who will
discuss the the G-pled component.
>> Thank you, Mr. Lusk. Uh, just number one
can confirm. Can everybody hear me?
Okay.
>> Yes.
>> Great. Thank you. Um, and again, thank
you for the opportunity to speak tonight
and just give you some clarification and
and reminders of the chlet. Uh reminder
that this is not consideration or
approval of a G-Plet as as you've heard
several times. Just going over the
process should the developer choose to
apply at a later time.
As a reminder, the GPLET is an Arizona
uh approved process whereby the city may
take ownership of a of a of a property
uh and in essence lease it back at a
reduced property rate um if they are in
the central business district as this
project is, they can apply for an up to
8-year property tax abatement of 100% of
property taxes. Um and as everybody
recalls, mayor and council approved
resolution, resolution 23355,
which was our new policy and process
updates on GPLES. And then that was at
that time when we renewed the central
business district. Um just briefly on
the process for this um initial steps to
receive a GLED application. We would re
review the application with the city
staff and appropriate city staff to meet
to ensure that it meets the
requirements. Um we would go go through
with the developer and host a community
meeting. That would be the number one
step once we receive the application
with the appropriate neighborhood within
the notice area and go over any
questions, concerns, the full
development with the surrounding
community. Um,
at that point, we would then review a
full application taking into comments
and questions from the surrounding
community and ensure that it meets the
entitlement uh requests and what the uh
impacts may be. We would then bring it
to mayor and council uh for the initial
request to move forward with an a
third-party economic analysis. And in
that economic analysis, it would also
entail a uh a deep dive into really the
financial uh where wherewithal of the
developer and whether a uh the GPU is
warranted at this time. uh if there's a
gap in the financing or anything on
that, they would take a look at the
proforma and all the other financials of
the developer just warranting that it's
requ uh it's a it's a needed uh
incentive.
At that point, uh when we get that
economic analysis back, we would bring
the results of that, as you're all
familiar, back to mayor and council for
consideration. We would go over that and
in including at that time a draft
community benefits agreement that the
developer is required to enter into with
the surrounding neighborhood. Um once
we've presented that to mayor and
council, we're looking for direction to
actually enter into and formal approval
of the Jeepled itself. So we in essence
we have three mayor and council meetings
and a neighborhood meeting uh to go over
this process. Um, all of this is
engaging the stakeholders and everybody
involved to make sure that we're going
through the process to to provide
appropriate benefits for the surrounding
community. Um once it is approved, if it
assuming it is approved by mayor and
council, uh just a reminder that we do
have a 10% jeep rent that we would
collect which is in essence 10% of the
foregone property tax that is
distributed to the property taxes juris
jurisdictions
um including the school districts, FEMA
community college to ensure that they're
still getting some revenue over that
8-year period.
Um and then finally also once we've
entered into that GPL that 8-year period
after 3 years after the development
after their certificate of occupancy our
third party economic an uh analyst would
go back and do an independent audit just
to see where they are standing
financially and that they've actually
been doing what they say they've been
doing and the economic analysis is
fairly accurate.
That is the end of it and I just want to
remind everybody that again this is not
the consideration or approval of a
G-fllet. With that I'm happy to answer
any questions or take any comments as
needed. Thank you.
>> Thank you Mike. Really appreciate it. Um
I I for one um I'm I'm happy that we are
uh settling um 20 year plus
uh issue that has really kept uh that
particular piece of property next to
Hotel Congress and the MLK apartments
from being built. And um not happy of
how we got here. Um
I feel that the settlement
uh seems very rich. Um but I understand
the claims from the developer um in
terms of him spending time and money on
this. I want to reiterate that this
action does not bind the city of Tucson
uh to give DPI a G-plit. And so I feel
confident that as we move forward, uh
we're in a good place to be able to hit
the reset button and um make sure that
the development can stand within the
next two years and that property is put
to good use and that it produces jobs
and um and uh you know a good economic
development for the city of Tucson. So,
there's a motion and a second. Are there
any questions or further discussion?
Council member Cunningham.
>> Mike, how much is the current property
paying in property taxes?
>> Um, thank you, Councilman Cunningham. It
It's owned by the city of Tucson. We are
collecting zero revenue on the site
right now. It's tax. There is no taxes
collected on it.
>> If it becomes a hotel, will it be
assessed property taxes?
It would be assessed property taxes at
the hotel rate. Correct. It would be go
into private ownership and assessed at
that rate.
>> If you back out the GPL part, would we
still be collecting more property taxes
than we are now?
>> Uh with the GLET rent, yes, we would
>> So, we'd be collecting more revenue than
we are now. Um it's in it's in the Riovo
district, correct?
>> That is correct. So, if we build the
hotel between rent, uh, excuse me,
between the bed tax and the sales taxes,
would we be collecting more property
tax, more sales taxes than we are now?
>> That's correct, Councilman Cunningham
would be collecting significantly more
revenue that is currently generated on
the site, which is zero.
>> Does the Moxy Hotel brand is a Marriott
brand correct?
>> That's correct. Is Marriott allow does
Marriott allow their to your knowledge
and this is a leading question. Does
Marriott
brand hotels allow their workers to
unionize in 11 other states?
>> I'm not aware of that. I would defer
that question to Mr. Lusk.
>> It's important you know this stuff
because we want to be able to do this.
But yes, the answer is yes. So look,
this is for the worker power folks who
showed up. I appreciate you all. But
this is a net positive for us. It's in
other words, if we don't give this guy
the settlement on the lawsuit that they
just spent 15 minutes circling around
about, we get nothing. So we get it's
way better to get something from it's
better to get part of something than
nothing. And so that's the deal. So, I
know that worker power did a great first
of all, y'all did a master class in
organizing against this, but I promise
and I promise you everyone up here would
have voted no except all these other
factors are involved. We're not writing
this dude a check. He just gets a
discount on what taxes he pays for like
9 years, but if we don't give it to him,
he builds nothing and we get nothing.
So, that's kind of what I wanted to
convey to y'all. That's why I'm voting
yes for this. But I don't want you to
think that we don't read our emails and
understand what's happening.
>> Any other questions or comments?
>> And again, this particular settlement
agreement does not bind us to a G-plit.
Uh that process still needs to happen
and go through the all of the process in
terms of uh what GPLIT um applicants go
through. Um, if we do not have any
additional questions or comments, um,
all those in favor of the motion. No. Is
it a roll call? Okay, let's go to roll
call.
>> Miss Sulik,
>> I.
>> Mr. Dah,
>> Mr. Cunningham,
>> I.
>> Mr. Perez,
>> I,
>> Mrs. Lee,
>> Vice Mayor Santa Cruz,
>> I,
>> Mayor Romero,
>> I. Motion passes 70 and it's resolution
24015.
Uh we move on to the next item. Item 9,
public hearing update to the city of
Tucson's major streets and routes plan.
City managers communication number 318
dated October 8th is received into and
made part of the record. This is the
time and place legally advertised for a
public hearing on consideration of
proposed amendment to the major streets
and routes plan and map. This amendment
will update the MSNR map to reflect
recommended adjustments to future
rightway values and street
classification citywide. This public
hearing is scheduled to last for no more
than an hour. Speakers are limited to
five minute presentations. Do we have
any requests to speak?
>> One. Okay, we have one. Um,
when I call your name, please uh make
your way into the mic, state your name,
whether you live in the city and whom
you are representing, and whether or not
you are a paid speaker. Our one and only
speaker is Bonnie Polos.
Good evening, Mayor and Council. Thank
you for the opportunity to speak at the
public hearing. My name is Bonnie Polus.
I live in the Campus Farm neighborhood.
Um, and I've been there for a very long
time. In fact, I've been doing this for
a very long time. The very first
commission I ever sat on in Tucson was
the Citizen Transportation Advisory
Committee, which no longer exists, but
was um split into several other advisory
commissions dealing with not just
roadways, but transit and pedestrians
and bicycles. Um, the reason I wanted to
be on that commission many years ago was
that I realized um that I didn't
understand why we were making the
transportation decisions that we were
within the city.
And I understood that transportation
issues inform, impact, and affect land
use decisions wherever they occur.
I would like you to know that I support
this update to the major streets and
routes plan. It was first approved just
a year before I sat on my first
commission. Um, and it makes sense to
adjust that plan as we grow as a
community. But one of the issues that
was brought up to us at the last minute
was an upgrade to some streets in my
neighborhood
and they're an upgrade from local
streets to collector streets. And with
the ordinance that you passed in the
spring
um allowing more intense development
along all of our major streets, it was
of great concern to us that we were not
involved in any of the decisionmaking
that went into this proposed upgrade.
And so I started a campaign of letting
neighbors and other people in the
community know that this was taking
place and to send uh letters and emails
to you requesting that this update be
removed from this or this upgraded
proposal be removed from this update. I
listened to the study session this
morning, this afternoon, and it was very
gratifying to hear that amendment will
be put forward to remove Limber Lost and
Mountain Avenue north of Roger Road as
collector streets. As I understood the
amendment,
the uh upgrade to Liberlost will be
removed from Campbell Avenue to Stone
Avenue.
To the west of Stone Avenue, Liberlos
becomes five lanes, but after Oracle
Road, it reverts again to a local street
with a lot of residential units.
I understand the
the reasoning behind the engineers who
want to make this upgrade, but for those
of us who live in the campus farm
neighborhood, we really want to be part
of any discussion that upgrades these
streets from local streets to collector
streets because that will impact the
development that occurs in our
community. Um, lumber lost is kind of a
strange street in the county. Up until
the '9s when it was first um, annexed
into the city, the county had plans to
make Liberlost a major arterial
and to place the Tucson Mall along
Liberlost as opposed to Wetmore. So when
the city annexed all of this property,
it was somewhat confusing to figure out
what was going to happen to Liberlost.
Limber Lost was designated always as a
local street within the campus farm
neighborhood. It was designated as a
collector street to the west of First
Avenue and it created a lot of issues of
understanding how the roadway was going
to be dealt with. I appreciate your
responsiveness to the neighbors who took
the time to register their concerns and
I hope that you will go ahead and put
forward the amendment to remove this
upgrade from this update of the major
streets and routes plan. I would also
like to leave with the city clerk the
petition that we circulated that has 235
names on it for the public record. Thank
you very much.
>> Thank you, Miss Pulos.
All righty. So, um are there any other
individuals in the audience w wishing to
speak on this item?
Seeing none, may I have a motion to
close the public hearing, please?
>> Moved. Second, your honor.
>> There is a motion and a second. Any
further discussion on closing the public
hearing?
Hearing none. All those in favor signify
by saying I.
>> I.
>> Any any against?
Motion carries. Public hearing is
closed. Um, Miss Clerk, you are
requested to read resolution 2414
by number and title only. Resolution
number 24014
relating to planning and zoning and
transportation, replacing the existing
major streets and routes map with one
adjusting the future ride ofway values
for various roadway segments citywide
and reclassifying various arterial and
collector roadway segments citywide.
replacing the existing major streets and
routes plan with one bringing the plan
into conformance with the corresponding
amendments to the major streets and
routes map. declaring that amendments to
the MSNR map and plan approved and
adopted through this resolution will not
impact existing transportation programs
whose funding and specific loss have
already been tied to street
classifications
existing prior to this resolution such
as Proposition 101, Proposition 411 or
the collector streets program.
All
>> righty. May I have a motion, please?
Mayor, I move to pass and adopt
resolution 24014.
>> There is a motion.
>> Second.
>> Motion in a second. Any further
discussion? Council member D.
>> Thank you, Mayor. I'd like to make a an
amendment to the motion to exclude um
Liberlost from Stone to Campbell and
Mountain from Roger to Liberlos uh from
being designated collector and leave
them as local.
So there is a request to amend the
motion.
Is the motion maker amendable?
>> Absolutely. And the the seconder.
>> Okay. So there's a motion, a second to
accept the amendment. Uh this is an
opportunity for discussion and and I
guess for me I know that we've spent a
couple of years maybe three uh two
trying to amend our uh major streets and
routes plan. And the reason that mayor
and council gave direction to amend the
major streets and routes plan is because
it really wasn't antiquated. Uh it was
put together in the 80s with the idea of
expanding
our roads within the city of Tucson. And
so that plan and that map prevented
um the city of Tucson and mayor and
council to have much more urban
transitoriented
development
and it demanded us to expand the roads
versus building density uh in our city.
And so it really didn't match with the
policy priorities of mayor and council.
Um, I guess for me my question is how
many public meetings did we have and
um,
you know, were they virtual? Were they
in person? What was the participation?
Did we invite neighborhoods to
participate in the discussion?
um because I noticed that the um
community meetings were had fairly low
attendance and so um just wanted to hear
about public meetings and how we engage
neighborhoods and in different swats and
areas of our city.
>> Good evening, Madame Mayor. Uh joining
me again today is planning and
programming administrator Patrick
Hartley. Patrick led the effort with his
team and so I'll defer to Patrick to
answer the question you just asked.
Patrick,
>> madame mayor, uh, members of the
council, thank you for the question. To
state the exact number of public
meetings, it would be hard for me to
recall specifically. We held a number of
meetings with the stakeholder workshops
which was largely targeted around the
development community and people who
would be developing or redeveloping
along major streets and routes. We held
a public openhouse, a virtual public
openhouse. Um, we did a uh social media
distribution, coordinated with the ward
offices to get the word out and also did
press releases. And a lot of the
activity that we did see was hosted
through our um online interactive map
which showed basically the changes to
every segment of the streets as well as
opportunities for members of the
community to interact with that, read
through the rationale. All told, we
received 150 public comments and we also
had a couple of additional stakeholder
sessions with the utility specifically.
Um, I don't remember. I think we had
three to four specific neighborhood
meetings upon request by those
neighborhood associations.
And Sam and and Patrick, I know that
your team spent two years and a lot of
time really thinking through um how to
um amend the major streets and routes uh
plan and and map. And I really
appreciate the work. I think going
forward um it's important that we have
um
more in-person engagement and making
sure that just as we seek out um
different stakeholders in our community
and put together conversations and input
sessions with other stakeholders that we
do similar with the residents and and
neighborhoods. I think that residents
feel that they need to be heard versus
just informed.
And so in order to get the best um input
from different stakeholders in our
community, I think it's important that
we um reach out and engage and hear um
of course it's always important to
inform and say this is the reason why uh
but also engage and hear their concerns.
But um again, I want to emphasize how
important it is to continue
really with the comprehensive approach
that we're looking at um in urban
planning and how to continue doing
infill development as well as transit
oriented development and multi-uses
uh for our city. It's important. We
heard council member Cunningham just
say, right? And when we see development,
we see jobs created, we see um you know
the benefit, the economic benefit of of
investing density and and building in
the urban core. So, just
that um
that piece of observation that I have
with this and thank you, Council Member
Dah, for um engaging your neighborhoods
and and bringing us a good um a good
amendment to to the issue. Any other
comments or questions for
um staff
here? Seeing none, um I believe we need
to go to roll call. Thank you so much,
Sam and and Patrick. Thank you for your
hard work.
>> Mrs. Lee,
>> hi.
>> Mr. Pettis,
>> I
>> Mr. Cunningham.
>> Hi,
>> Mr. D.
>> Mulik.
>> Hi,
>> Vice Mayor Santa Cruz.
>> I, Mayor Romero,
>> I resolution 24014
passes by a vote of seven 70. Thank you
everyone.
Yes, I agree.
Well done. Thank you. Item 10, appeal
from the appeal of the water service
area review board's denial of service to
Puma County, parcel number 225-14-206E,
located at 7845
North Northern Avenue in unincorporated
Pima County. City Manager's
communication number 313 dated October
8th is received into and made part of
the record. Um, where was I?
Where am I? Let's see. This is an appeal
hearing required by the city of Tucson's
water service area policy. Sorry about
that. I got lost. Concerning the water
service area review board's
recommendation of denial of service to
Puma County parcel number 225-14-206E
located at 7845 North Northern Avenue in
unincorporated Pima County. Will staff
be making a presentation on this? Uh Mr.
Avery? Yes. No. Okay. Mayor, there's no
presentation unless you need questions.
>> All righty. Um, this appeal hearing is
scheduled to last for no more than an
hour. Speakers are limited to 5 minute
presentation. Uh, please come forward
and I call your name and make your
presentation. State your name, whether
you live in the city whom you are
representing, and whether or not you are
paid speaker. Do we have any speakers
for this? Okay. So, we don't have any
speakers. I move we close the public
hearing.
>> Is anyone in the audience wishing to be
heard on this item?
Hearing none. May I have a motion to
close the public? Is there
>> Okay, there's a person uh come to the um
taller mic. Please state your name,
whether you live in the city of Tucum,
whom you are representing, and whether
you or not you're a paid speaker.
>> Oh, yes. Hi, my name is Dne. Um I do not
live in the city. Um, I am here on
behalf of the owner of the property. She
couldn't make it, so I told her I would
come out and voice her opinion for her.
So, um, because of the rules,
uh, the way her lot is situated, it's a
flag lot and she has another flag lot
that wraps around her that prevents her
from getting water until her neighbor
gets water. Um, and we were hoping to
get an appeal to allow her to gain
access to water. Um, not having to wait
for her neighbor to gain water.
>> Thank you so much. Are there any
questions?
Hearing none. Uh, thank you so much,
sir. Really appreciate your time.
>> May have a motion to close the public
hearing, please.
>> Seconded.
>> There is a motion and a second.
All those in favor, please signify by
saying I.
>> I.
>> Any against?
Motion carries. The appeal hearing is
closed. What is the council's pleasure?
>> Madame Mayor, I move we up uphold the
denial of water service to this area
outside the service area because it we
can't do it following our rules.
>> Yeah. Thank you.
>> All righty. So, there is a motion to
uphold Tucson Waters original denial and
the WSARB's
ratification of that decision. That's a
motion. Do I get a second?
>> Second.
>> There is a motion and a second. Any
further discussion? Councilman Lee. And
then Council Member Cunningham.
>> This one reminds me of the appeal case
we had several months ago. And if you
look at the map, it's it's an easy
logical thing for me to say that we
should appeal because there is just that
little sliver of land per the lot design
that is preventing this parcel from
getting water, but there's literally
water surface around the entire area.
So, I know we have the ability to make
these types of decisions. So, I would
love to hear what my colleagues say, but
if you look at the map, I I can easily
make a case that we should appeal it and
provide water service. So, those are my
thoughts. I'm happy to offer a
substitute motion, but I want to hear
what everyone has to say.
>> Yeah.
>> My question is just about that
specifically is do they have why don't
they're pretty far out. I'm trying to
figure out why they're not eligible for
Oralo Valley or Metro or one of the
other providers.
Honorable mayor, members of the council,
in order for another water provider to
service this one or both of these
parcels, they'd be crossing over the
Tucson water um system, if not our
service area, in order to to reach them.
I don't have an approximate distance of
how far they are from one of those other
providers.
>> Any other questions? Council member
Oulck,
>> thank you. Um, in in the prior appeal
that we heard, there was already a home
uh that the owners were trying to sell.
I believe there was the structures.
Could uh Chris maybe you help us
differentiate this case from the prior
ca the recent case that we heard?
Good evening um members of the mayor and
council and mayor Romero. Chris Avery
with the city attorney's office. Um this
appeal presents a unique situation um
over the last 18 years or so of the
adoption of the water service policy in
that because of the unique configuration
of this lot. You can see it pretty
clearly on the map. Council member Lee
talked about it. the the the question
for the water service appeal board is
whether Tucson Water made a correct
determination in following the policy to
decline service to the parcel. And
because of the unique configuration of
this lot and the way that that policy
applies, this lot only has two sides,
even though there's a very interesting
kind of dog leg um situation.
So when the appeals board heard this um
set of facts because of their limited
jurisdiction which the question that
they asked to address is whether Tucson
Water made a correct determination
whether the policy is upheld. They
rejected the appeal. They took the
unique step that I have not seen um
previously in my career of recommending
that the appellant take an appeal to the
mayor and council because of the mayor
and council's additional discretion to
consider the facts of the situation that
neither Tucson water nor the appeals
board can consider. And in this case
what you see is a situation where the
lot is flagpulled th those members of
the appeal board are
also here for some questions. But you
can see on the on the map that there's a
unique dog leg situation here. And
somebody who we there was not
information presented at the appeal to
determine whom. But if somebody had
configured this lot differently in
surveying and setting it out, this
parcel would not have been blocked from
obtaining water service. The basically
if the driveways had been reversed in
this case, then the parcel would have a
service. So, it's a unique situation in
that the appeals board found that Tucson
Water correctly applied the policy but
did make a recommendation that the
appellant go to proceed to mayor and
council to see whether there was some
additional discretion that could be
applied in this case.
>> Your honor, I have a couple more
questions.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. Is this
is this property currently uh under
subject to a reszone?
My understanding is that the property
has already been split in this
configuration with the two dog legs.
>> Okay, that's good to know.
>> But it shows on the map.
>> Are there any neighbors objecting to the
water service providing?
>> There wasn't any information presented
at the hearing about whether neighbors
were objecting to the to the water
service being provided to this parcel.
>> So, those are the two pieces that are
kind of important to me. This is a
really unique situation because the
parcel if this was one parcel it would
be t it would automatically be eligible.
I mean they could literally come back
they could literally combine the lots
come back get water service and then
subdivide them again. I mean, they could
they it just doesn't make any
and because the they have that long
string underneath that
if it was just a regular rectangle, it
would get service. So, it
>> it's it's not
>> Is that a driveway? Is this little
stretch out a driveway? Is that what
that is? Yeah, it's essentially a dog
leg or or a an easement across the
former, you know, basically the across
the former parcel back over to Northern
Avenue
to get to the to get to the street and
also to provide access for for utilities
and and access to the site. So the water
policy was I think the mayor and I are
the only two that oh and Karen that but
we the three of us when we did the water
policy we fought toothot tooth and nail
for it. It was the first thing I ever
did of meaning on the council and
looking at this one word three is right.
We have to protect the in integrity of
the water policy per se, but in this
situation,
I don't think anybody ever bargained on
having the driveway that comes out
blocking you from being able to get
policy. I mean, if you I mean, there are
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 nine parcels that
surround the two parcels in question
that are all having water service. It
doesn't really
I just it doesn't pass the I common
sense test for me. So, I'm going to
withdraw my second and ask to entertain
another motion. Before you do that, I
know that Council Member Ulik has uh has
some questions. Council member,
>> thank you, Mayor. Yeah, I I um I really
do also applaud and respect uh Council
Member Doll's motion and uh just all of
us understanding that we cannot
undermine the water service policy or
the map. It's critical. Uh and at the
same time there are just uh just very
rare anomalies like this obviously that
are that are popping up and um it's my
understanding that the parcel to the
west it looks like is obligated for
service and um on our map and and uh I I
just want to clarify as well. Chris,
what is the is this zoned residential?
What's the maximum water use that we're
talking about if we were to proceed with
with um uh allowing for this appeal?
>> So, it's my recollection from the
hearing and I've confirmed with the
representative today that it's zoned
residential. So there would be one one
residence on this parcel
>> because I I do think that's the other
piece to me that's real important is you
know uh the degree to which our water
supply would be impacted uh by uh you
know by the appeal and and it is in that
way similar to the case that we recently
saw and and uh in this case I I don't
know that we really risk the overarching
policy so much as recognized we drew a
map over you know 300 square miles or or
so and that there were just a few
anomalies that um you know that are
coming up now. Um, so I'm receptive as
well to just hearing other thoughts from
colleagues.
>> I I just guess for me I want to make
sure that we're not opening a floodgate
to other requests
um and
that we um
really avoid unintended consequences.
Uh yes, of course, Council Member
Cunningham, you and I and Council Member
Ulik were here when we fought for the
water service area policy, and we worked
really hard on a map as to um
where to serve and where we wanted to
grow. and we were very adamant about
protecting our uh water
uh resources and managing them
responsibly. We did receive a letter
from our water coalition requesting that
we uphold the water service area policy
and deny this appeal thereby supporting
the decisions made by Tucson Water and
the water service area review board. Um,
would you be able to add anything else
to this, um, Mr. Avery? And does this
open up a floodgate of others wanting to
come in and and ask the mayor and
council to overturn the denial? So, I
can answer that question in one way,
which is that
we
in our role as a city attorney, we're
obligated to defend staff and we're
obligated to defend the processes that
happened here and defend the statute. In
this case, that's what we're doing. But
the the appeals board itself did
recognize that the circumstances of this
case are unusual and I don't recall an
appeals board ever making that kind of
determination in a prior matter.
>> Mr. Tamir,
>> thank you, Mayor. Uh, one question I
would uh ask you to if you're going to
consider overturning it is ask the
applicant or their representative if
they plan to build build a pool. The
reason I asked that and I don't know if
you can constrain that but this n the
neighborhood within which these parcels
are set are all single family homes
generally looks like 3/4 to 1acre lots.
Every one of them has a pool except for
one. To the north is an apartment
complex and to the east is a commercial
area. So um this doesn't look like it
would have a domino effect on the area.
it'd be this house and perhaps the
neighbor house who can get service
today. Um, but I I'd be when you think
about water use of a single family home
and I look at a map with 10 homes and
nine pools, I think that'd be an
interesting question. Having said that,
I every time one of these would come up,
you have the discretion. It doesn't set
a precedent for you. Um, and
other there are other lots that probably
have similar unique circumstances. Um,
but I don't I don't see it as being an
overwhelming number.
>> Counciloman Lee.
>> Um, I would I would just like to make a
a motion that we uh approve the appeal.
>> Seconded.
>> So, there's a motion to approve the
appeal. And
I guess I I just for just to make sure
that we had a motion on the floor. I
believe the seconder removed uh the
second. Um it dies for lack of second.
And so what is
um I guess what is the next? Okay. Any
discussion on the second motion?
>> Council member Ulik.
>> Thank you. Yeah, thank you. So,
I wish I I I apologize for not asking
this before, but uh Chris or Tim,
how many parcels like this are we
talking about? Because we've seen now
this this is the second one perhaps in
the last six months. I mean, are there
hundreds of parcels like this within our
service area map? Are there thousands?
Are there 10? Can you kind to the
mayor's question about are we going to
see a flurry of these? I I I know it's
not precedent setting, but then again,
if if this times the thousand is coming
our way, that's concerning.
>> So,
there's probably um thousands of
different lot configurations within the
Tucson Water Service area. it would be
um I I've I've been known to step way
outside my areas of confidence, but to
for me to express an opinion on that
would be going even beyond the
boundaries that sometimes I set. But I I
would like to point out though that
this there is in the record here from
the
um from the legal action report some
concern that was expressed by
um the members of the water service
appeals board about the negligence uh in
in establishing this particular lot
configuration which is also a unique
circumstance. So I can say generally
um that there are many different lot
configurations
there are very rarely is is a lot so
poorly configured as this one and it's
also rare that the lot is so poorly
configured by a third party rather than
a lot owner who can remedy that
configuration once it happens. So again,
um
the city manager, myself, uh some of you
folks on the council have been dealing
with these issues for a long time.
Unique by its strict definition means a
one of one, but so I wouldn't call this
a unique situation, but this is
certainly an unusual situation.
Honorable mayor and council member
Ulich, what I would add to that,
regardless of your action tonight, this
is something we could do an analysis of
giving you a magnitude because if this
does become
a more regular thing cuz we we went for
years with zero and now we've had two.
Um, and then so we can do an analysis,
see if there's other situations like
this. And then my caution would be
are we inadvertently opening another
path for people to now subdivide parcels
in a way that then that they might not
be able to subdivise it to meet the
policy, but they might be able to
subdivise it to meet the standard of an
appeal. So that's my concern. I I don't
think there's thousands that are like
this, but there's probably a thousand
different ways somebody could configure
a parcel to try to circumvent the
policy. So I don't think that is
germanine to tonight necessarily, but I
would commit to we could bring back some
analysis to you in the future.
>> Yeah. And I would like to point out that
the process involved here means that if
the mayor and council want us to
proceed, then we would return to mayor
and council with the resolution granting
service here and we could incorporate
some of that analysis. Gives you one
more chance to take a look at the
circumstances and determine what to do.
And I wonder if
>> Oh, I'm sorry.
>> Go ahead, council member.
>> I I I that's that I guess is my follow-
on question then. Do we continue this so
that we can look at this in with some
context? Um, and what are the
implications of continuing the item for
30 days or um, uh, so that we're, you
know,
listening to all of the voices that that
are concerned and and recognizing
uh, the implications.
Uh, I would just point out that under
either path the mayor and council may be
inclined to take, whether it be a
continuence or returning with the
resolution, there's an opportunity for
the mayor and council exercise
discretion one more time in this matter.
>> Yeah, I I see this um parcel way north.
Um, but the area is covered and littered
with um
um properties that are being served. So,
I mean, that's where we all are feeling
um concerned, but I really do want to
avoid unintended consequences um that
could put us in a bind of people just
changing things around and and then
bringing it to us when they whenever
they receive denial. My most important
goal is to be responsible stewards of
our water resources
and um
be able to analyze
um what the pros and the cons are. I I
you know I'm I'm tending to
move in the direction of the motion to
allow for for service, but I do want to
see a resolution. And I do like the idea
of requesting that,
you know, um that we uh uh be allowed to
look at the resolution and what are the
the uh requests that we're asking.
>> So perhaps a a solution in this matter
would be that typically a resolution
that returns would go on consent, but
perhaps we could schedule the resolution
as a numbered item for consideration.
Okay.
Is that okay? Is that good?
>> Your honor, do we need to add the motion
for the anal the analysis?
>> I think that the the staff is Yeah.
>> We'll take direction from that
discussion.
>> Yeah.
>> And council member
>> and point of clarification. So, we are
not actually voting tonight to approve
the appeal. We're we're directing staff
to come back with a resolution that
would include a decision on the appeal
as well as the analysis. Is that what
I'm understanding?
>> Yes.
>> I thought
>> you you basically approve the appeal,
but the appeal would return with a
resolution that would give you another
opportunity to look at the circumstances
and the additional analysis that's been
requested.
>> I don't need to change the motion or
we're good. I think the the motion um on
the table is as directed based on the
conversation we're having. Is that good?
>> Okay. And the secondary is good.
>> I'm sorry. This is Karen.
I think I want to do a substitute motion
because I would prefer that we
simultaneously consider this appeal with
the analysis coming back. Um, so I I
guess my motion is to continue this item
and um have it on an agenda that would
provide us with the broader analysis.
Um,
uh, I I just don't quite feel
comfortable
uh assuming that we won't
see some, you know, pattern set here
without more information. So the motion
is to continue this and direct staff to
come back with this item uh in
conjunction with that broader analysis.
>> So there is a substitute motion.
Do I hear a second?
>> I'll second it.
>> Yeah, I'll second too. Sorry.
>> Okay. So, there is a motion in a second
on a substitute motion. So, we're going
to vote on this if there's no further
discussion, right? Uh, and a question.
There's discussion. Councilwoman Lee,
>> I I'm just curious as to the impact of
further delays. Um, to me, this one
seems pretty straightforward and
understand the need for an analysis. So,
I guess my my preference is always like
move this forward and do the analysis if
this parcel is very logically surrounded
by water. So, how would we know if
there's an impact to the property owner
by continuing to delay this?
>> She the the homeowner is currently
building a small house 600 square ft.
Um, and she was hoping that the neighbor
was going to get her water meter in so
then she could get granted access to get
water. The owner, you know, just to the
south of her, um, just couldn't come up
with the funds to pay for it. Um, she
offered to pay for it. She didn't feel
comfortable taking that. Um, so here we
are. She kind of has paused building. or
her house is just kind of sitting
stagnant while she's paying rent on
another place to live
>> uh to finish up this place.
>> Yeah. See, I I guess I don't see the
value in making them wait if if we feel
comfortable that this particular
isolated situation makes sense. Let's
move it. That That's my thought. Let's
move it forward and um do the analysis
separate. So, I don't know. Council
member Pettis and then council member
Cunningham. Yeah, I think that this is
an inherent part of this process and I
understand the concern of wanting to
uphold what we've already set in motion.
Um, but I would concur with Council
Member Lee in allowing this particular
case and then moving forward with
analysis separately.
>> Council member Cunningham,
>> as the person who seconded all three
motions in this process,
uh, I thought I'd chime in. So, we're
coming back for resolution irrespective
of what we vote tonight. Um, more or
less by
provisionally approving or continuing.
By provisionally approving, it's a
little nod to the the the property owner
to have some hope. By just continuing,
it's like, h, not so fast. And it's very
it's a pretty nuanced thing.
>> So, for me, part of this this whole
discussion that we're having. It doesn't
really
teeter either way. I'd rather
I'd actually rather have all the
information. I think there's some I'd
much rather I'd feel way more
comfortable
giving staff the opportunity to go, you
know what, this isn't going to affect
our actual water policy that we adopted
and take super seriously. But I want to
say for the record that 95% of my
instincts are I'm going to vote to
approve this person's water. But I just
want to have that backup. And the issue
is is that we've run into the the way
that my brain's thinking is we're going
to have folks that own parcels that will
literally subdivide parcels so they can
shoehorn into the water policy area
where they're not supposed to be. In
this case, it's a donnut hole, so it
should absolutely be in the water
service area, but
>> and I I'm saying that on the record, but
in the meantime, we got to get our
process done. And I and if we were if we
were cut and dry, we wouldn't be asking
for the analysis, too. So, let's back
ourselves up. I just I don't think it I
don't think either one puts us put will
put her behind that much as long as we
come back within 30 days. like we got to
come back quick
>> and I just wonder if we can can come
back within 30 days
or at least bring the resolution back if
we if we delay the approval.
>> Honorable mayor, members of the council,
we can get the analysis done within
about a 30-day period. It won't be a
really granular analysis, but it's going
to be a pretty broad analysis of the 450
square mile service area. But we think
we can give you enough information to
work with. Um and
uh with um apologies to the city
attorney, I'm going to ask a question I
don't know the answer to. Under a
continuence, we'd be bringing back the
appeal again. Is it possible to also
schedule the resolution for that same
evening or would that have to be at a
subsequent meeting?
I think we could probably schedule the
resolution for later on the evening as a
different numbered item. So, we do that
sometimes with annexations where we'll
do item 6 A or 6B or we'll do item six
and then item seven. I think we could do
it that way. Again, I'm answering a
question I don't know the answer to.
>> Well, we're making it up as we go. Roy,
would you like to weigh in on this?
>> Sure, why not? Um, I would I would agree
with Chris's analysis. Um and just to
clarify for procedural purposes, we have
two motions on the floor right now. Uh
the correct when discussion is finished,
we need to vote on whether the mo
substitute motion is accepted and then
vote on that motion if it is accepted.
>> Okay. So the substitute motion is to
delay approval, bring the resolution
next month as well as bring an analysis
of the possibilities. I would much
rather have information in hand. Um, and
I know that we're delaying another 30
days, but but I would much rather have
the information and then the resolution
to approve or deny uh within the next 30
days so that we have more information.
I'm I'm concerned about any unintended
consequences and then m maybe we we can
have the possibility of including
administratively
uh for the water service area review
board and Tucson Water to take a look at
um paying special attention to
um subdividing pieces of land in order
to play the system. or play us out.
Um
so with that motion, substitute motion
on the floor to delay
um for 30 days
bringing down back a resolution and an
analysis. That's the motion that we're
getting ready to vote on. Um do you want
to do a roll call just in case? All
right, let's go to roll call on the
substitute motion.
>> Mr. Cunningham.
>> Hi. Mr. Dah.
>> Hi.
>> M Mrs. Lee.
>> No.
>> Mr. Perez.
>> Miss Sulik.
>> I.
>> Vice Mayor Santa Cruz.
>> Mayor Romero. I. Uh. Substitute motion
passes.
>> If I may, your honor, the substitute
motion is accepted. Now it needs to be
voted on. Oh, the substitute motion is
accepted. All righty. Now, we vote on
the substitute motion, which is
basically the same.
>> I still got one more question.
>> Okay, go ahead.
>> I want to be sure that we're going to
bring another item agendaized for the
resolution next time, just in case the
analysis goes well.
>> All right, then that's good and I'm good
with that.
>> Okay, so now a vote on the substitute
motion.
Roll call.
Mr. Cunningham.
>> Hi.
>> Mr. Dah.
>> Mrs. Lee.
>> I have to be consistent. No.
>> Um, Mr. Pettis.
>> No.
>> Mulik.
>> I.
>> Vice Mayor Santa Cruz.
>> Mayor Romero.
>> I. Uh. Substitute motion passes and
original motion dies.
All righty. Um, thank you. I really
appreciate the patience and um we can
continue the discussion in a month.
Thank you. All righty. So that was item
>> uh 10. Item 11.
>> Item item 11 resoning TP NT0425
DI N need children and family services
North Mountain Avenue and East Duke Road
R1 and R2 to 01. City managers
communication number 316 stated October
8th is received into and made part of
the record. This is a request to reszone
approximately 4.3 acre parcel from
suburban ranch zone to RX2 residence
zone to allow for the development of
five onetory
single family homes on lot sizes
consistent with the surrounding
development. The zoning examiner
recommends authorization of zoning
subject to certain conditions. Is the
applicant or representative of the
applicant present?
>> Mayor, I just want to point out I think
that was the wrong reasonzoning case
that you just read.
>> Okay,
>> I apologize. That's okay.
>> It's the tuniito. We're reszoning to 01.
>> Let me see. I have the wrong information
here.
>> Um
But they they didn't revise it before.
>> Okay.
>> I don't know why she
>> Let me just go to the online version
then.
>> Oh my god. My
>> my computer just died.
>> I don't bring a copy.
>> It's coming to you. For the record, I am
Carrie Silvin with Lazarus and Silven
representing Tunito.
>> Well, that's good because we had no
idea.
>> I have the resolution.
>> No. Can I But is it the resolution
number though?
>> There is no resolution. We just accept
>> resourc.
>> All righty. So item 11 is a resoning.
Um Tonyito Children and Family Services
North Mountain Avenue and East Duke Road
uh R1 and R2 to 01 in Ward 3.
>> Okay. Yes, your honor.
>> All righty. So, um, who's the
representative of the applicant? And can
you please, um, put it into the record?
I know you did, but I'm asking you again
because I was not paying attention to
you.
>> Mayor, mayor and members of the council,
Carrie Silvin with Lazarus and Silvin
representing Tunidito, and I also have
Liz McCusker from TUNITO here as well.
>> Um, are you agreeable to the proposed
requirements?
>> Yes, your honor, we are agreeable. We
like we appreciate we'd like to thank uh
W three uh Kevin Dah um for uh sticking
with us on this um and staff for
assisting as well. And um Bonnie Polus
is here as well from Campus Farms. We
have worked many of those years that she
alluded to together um and and also on
opposite sides of things and we
appreciate Campus Farm support. So,
we're excited to move this forward and
happy to answer any questions.
>> Well, thank you so much. I really
appreciate you doing the work with
Campus Farms and other neighbors in the
area. I know that the neighbors want to
see Dunidito expand uh into a building
that has been vacant. And so, I I do
want to also thank Council Member Dah
for um you know, his work on and his
part of the work in this. and um looking
forward to uh what the council's
pleasure is.
>> Your honor, I move to approve the
request for resoning as recommended by
the zoning examiner.
>> Second.
>> So there is a motion and a second. Any
further discussion on this motion
hearing? None.
>> Could we have an analysis?
>> Yeah.
>> No.
>> Sorry.
Sorry.
>> Trigger.
>> Overruled. All righty. No more. No more
questions. Council member Cunningham.
Um, anything else? Anyone? Okay.
>> So, uh, this is a voice vote. All those
in favor of the motion, please signify
by saying I.
>> I. I.
>> I.
>> I was just make I was just poking fun at
you.
>> All those against,
uh, there are none. Motion carries.
Thank you all so much. I think we got
the sillies.
>> I think you are too.
>> Yes. Thank you very much.
Thank you so much. Really appreciate you
all coming to us. All righty. So, um
motion carries. We are moving on to item
12. Item 12, mayor, has been continued
at the request of council member Dah.
>> All righty. And we move on to item 13.
Resolution mayor and council opposing
federal interference and disinvestment
in high education and defending the
University of Arizona against proposed
compact for academic excellence in high
education.
All right.
City manager communication number 322
dated October 8th is received into and
made part of the record. Miss Clerk, you
are requested to read resolution 24018
by number and title only. Resolution
number 24018
relating to higher education and human
rights opposing targeted federal
interference and disinvestment in higher
education and defending the University
of Arizona against the proposed compact
for academic excellent excellence in
higher education. All righty. So this
item was brought to us by council member
Perez and Vice Mayor Santa Cruz. Council
member Perez, would you like to start?
and vice mayor if you'd like to jump in.
>> Yeah, thank you, mayor. Um, so this
might feel a little weird to introduce
something like this at the city level.
Um, but frankly, you know, when I came
into my role, uh, at the Metro Education
Commission, uh, I inherited a really
incredible archive of correspondence
between the founder, and folks like the
mayor, uh, former mayor Tom Vulgi,
Congressman Rul Graalva, and even your
dad, uh, George Cunningham, um, who
really, I think, bridge their service
between government and education and
recognizing that the strength of our
community uh was dependent on the
success of our schools. Um so I say that
in that I brought this item because
what's happening here at the University
of Arizona um is is also about Tucson.
Um the Trump's administration's compact
for academic excellence uh in higher ed
asks universities to pledge loyalty, not
excellence, conditioning federal funding
on political conformity. Uh that's not
someone else's business. Uh frankly,
that's ours. It's an intrusion into our
community and into the lives and
livelihoods of thousands of tonins who
study, teach, and work at the
university. Um, I also want to recognize
that this moment didn't necessarily
arise overnight. Uh, the university's
new administration has spent months
overcomplying with partisan demands at
the state and federal level. Um, that
posture of appeasement has left the
university more vulnerable, not less. Um
and now it's being rewarded rewarded
however coercive uh that re reward may
be uh for a pattern of compliance that
never should have began. Um capitulation
is not in Tucson's nature. Um the
university drives more than 1 billion in
research each year and sustains
thousands of local jobs. Uh
international students are a crucial
part of that ecosystem and are
competitive in the state uh in the
country and around the world. um some of
the policies that were included on there
uh cap international enrollment um and
discourage global engagement and I think
that that significantly harms higher
education um but also undermines our
economy and the cultural vibrancy that
really defines Tucson and so as a
partner in the prosperity initiative um
you know the city recognizes that
post-secondary access is fundamental to
community well-being um and I believe
that we have a moral and economic
responsibility to defend it. So with
that, um I want to thank uh my colleague
uh Vice Mayor and Dr. Lane Santa Cruz uh
for joining me in this resolution. And
uh with that, I want a motion to pass
and adopt the resolution number 24018.
>> There's a motion.
>> Yes, she
>> and a second. Any further discussion?
Vice Mayor, did you want to jump in?
Yes, I'll I'll just jump in and um
Rocky's um council member Pettis spoke
very eloquently um also as an educator,
you know, freedom of learning is a basic
human right and this resolution makes
clear that Tucson stands with our
students, our educators and the
University of Arizona and defending that
right. Um this so-called C camp compact
for academic excellence is not about
excellence, it's about control. It's
another attempt to make universities
choose between federal funding and their
independence. That kind of political
interference has no place in our
classrooms or research labs. The
University of Arizona has long been a
source of pride in our Tucson community,
a land grant institution, a Hispanic
serving institution, and a place where
discovery, critical thinking, and the
opportunity are meant to thrive.
Tucson's future depends on protecting
that freedom to learn, to question, to
innovate without fear or political
pressure. Um, again, I want to thank my
colleague, Council Member Rocky Perez,
for his deep commitment to higher
education and for acting simply to bring
this resolution forward. Um, his
leadership reminds me that defending
academic freedom is not just an
institutional issue. It's a community
value. Education should always be about
expanding minds, not enforcing
ideologies. That's why I'm proud to
stand with my colleagues in opposing
this federal overreach and affirming our
support for the University of Arizona
and for academic freedom.
>> Yes, you could go ahead and clap. Yes,
we'll give you time to clap.
Um I I just wanted to add to this
commentary. I think that we're not doing
this against the University of Arizona
and standing for this resolution. We are
doing this to defend the academic
integrity and the academic freedom of
the University of Arizona. Um,
compliance,
especially with Trump, does not bring
you any leeway. Compliance only uh
brings about much more um uh push back
from President Trump and his political
agenda. The University of Arizona has
already seen
uh sweeps uh to their Hispanic serving
institution grants uh to STEM
initiatives to TRIO programs uh to
diversity, equity, and inclusion.
uh it has already seen an intrusion
uh by this administration that is purely
political and compliance will get us
even more uh political demands from this
administration.
I am uh in solidarity with the um
professors and uh the University of
Arizona uh staff of faculty that have
taken a very very clear stance against
this compact. Uh this compact is
stemming from control
and uh not from um um
academic
um and learning in a learning
environment. So I stand with you. Thank
you, Council Member Pettis and Vice
Mayor Santa Cruz for acting quickly, for
adding this language, and for allowing
Mayor and Council to take a stand in
um standing with the faculty and staff
of the University of Arizona and in uh
solidarity with our community that does
not deserve to be threatened by the
president of the United States.
uh with pulling for their funding um uh
to comply with their political agenda.
>> Council member Don,
thank you, Mayor, and Mayor. You and
Vice Mayor Santa Cruz and um Council
Member Perez have said it very
eloquently, but I also want to say it.
I've heard from faculty leaders, I've
heard from staff, and I've heard from
students, and we heard tonight people
speaking eloquently of the concern about
this. It's not that some of the things
in the compact aren't great, you know,
the tuition freeze, for instance, but
it's the federal overreach. This is a
state institution. This is a land grant
college. Um, this is the heart of
Tucson. Damn it. We're wild cats. We're
not tame, right? Um, I was trying to
think of a better um analogy, but we are
Wildcats and we we need to support what
is the true heart of the university and
I'm very proud to be voting for this.
Thank you.
>> Any other comments?
>> I don't.
>> All righty, Council Member Perez, and
then we'll vote.
>> Yeah, you know, I think um
go over here.
I'll just add that um you know I think
in this last uh beginning of this
academic year the city of Tucson
um by way of just its annual investment
as well as W 5 in addition to Pima
County invested in uh post-secondary
access programs that are now officially
in almost every single public high
school within Pima County. We are the
only organization that has that
footprint and that's because of local
government like ours who are taking
action in these spaces and that's not
out of uh just an interest. It's out of
an imperative to care for these spaces
um because frankly the federal
government has it and so again you know
I'm thankful that you all are supporting
me in that effort.
>> All righty. Uh so any others?
Well, let's go to roll call.
>> Mr. Perez,
>> I.
>> Vice Mayor Santa Cruz,
>> Mr. Cunningham,
>> hi.
>> Mr. D.
>> Hi,
>> Mrs. Lee.
>> Miss Sulik.
>> I,
>> Mayor Romero,
>> I. Resolution 24018 passes by a vote of
70. Thank you so much for coming out.
Thank you.
Thank you for coming out. We really
appreciate your voices. Item 14, city
administration approving appointment of
new city attorney. City managers
communication number 321 dated October
8th is received into and made part of
the record. Miss clerk, you are
requested to read ordinance 12194 by
number and title only. Ordinance number
12194 relating to the new city attorney,
appointing Roy Lusk as the new city
attorney of the city of Tucson,
authorizing app and approving the
employment agreement with the city
attorney and declaring an emergency.
>> All righty. Um, what is the council's
pleasure?
>> I'd like to motion uh to approve the
ordinance as is and welcome Roy Lusk as
our permanent city attorney. Not. Yes.
Not as we need to vote first, then we
can welcome him.
>> Uh there is a motion and a second. Any
discussion on the motion? Council member
Cunningham.
>> Roy, congratulations on your
appointment. Um it was a a pretty
amazing process. Uh we're lucky to get
great candidates and demonstrated how
you stand out. um you've already
demonstrated some acumen and some uh
belief that you can uh fill the huge
shoes uh that were vacated in this role.
So I look forward to working with you
and we're really excited to have your
board.
>> Usually I'd be way cooler about this,
but I'm so tired and it's late. So
>> Roy, I just wanted to add as well, thank
you so much for your many, many years of
service. uh in the city attorney's
office. We welcome you. Well, not yet.
We still have two of them. Um a as our
city attorney, we did go through an
incredible process and you rose above
and I know that the attorneys um and
your staff at the city attorney's office
have the utmost respect and admiration
for you. I know that you will continue
to be innovative and um you bring
profound understanding and history with
you. Um, and I know that you will uh
continue innovating in your office,
continue um uh making sure that the city
attorney's office uh is is moving
forward
um increasingly
becoming better and better um for u for
the benefit of our citizens. And so um
really appreciate your interest. I'm I'm
I'm looking forward to voting for you
and uh I you know I I want to welcome
you. Hopefully we spend many more years
uh working together for benefit of our
community.
>> Any other comments?
>> Go ahead.
>> Yeah, you can add.
>> No, just uh Roy, I think our time
together has been short. Um and I know
that our time left will be even shorter.
Um I've been a part of search processes
uh in the dozens and I have never uh
observed this level of love within a
department for their leader and I hope
that in this direction you feel
empowered by council to do what you have
done best in defending two sonins and
defending those who lead them. Um and
I'm incredibly thankful for your service
thus far. I hope it's a lifetime.
>> Thank you, council member. That's that's
very kind. All
>> righty. We're going to go to roll call
and see if you make it through. Um let's
go to roll call. Mr. Perez,
>> hi.
>> Vice Mayor Santa Cruz.
>> Hi. Congratulations.
>> I
>> congratulations and thank you Roy. I
>> Mrs. Lee.
>> I
>> Mr. D. I,
>> Mr. Cunningham,
>> welcome to the majors. I,
>> Mayor Dome,
>> I, ordinance 12194 passes by a vote of
70. Congratulations
and welcome aboard, Mr. City Attorney.
>> Thank you, mayor. And if I can just take
a moment, uh I have to thank uh the man
who gave me this tie
>> and my wife
and my daughter who are also here uh and
my family who have supported me
throughout this process and I'm grateful
to them. And I I will say that that I my
staff, some of whom are here are are
very important to me and uh have
supported me also through this process.
I know I am the city attorney, but they
are the city attorney as well, and they
will always be that for me. So, and I'm
I'm really excited to to work with them
and to support them in the way that they
support me. And I'm looking forward to
also supporting the mayor and council in
their in their policies and processes uh
along with the city manager as well. And
I'm also looking forward to doing the
best that I possibly can for the
citizens in Tucson and the residents and
businesses here. Thank you.
Thank you and welcome aboard.
[Applause]
Item 15, adjournment.
>> Council will stand adjourned. The next
regularly scheduled meeting will be on
Tuesday, October 21st, 2025 at or after
5:30 p.m.
Hey. Hey. Hey.
[Music]